--- Page 1 ---
A parallel ﬁnite element scheme for thermo-hydro-mechanical (THM)
coupled problems in porous media
Wenqing Wang a,/C3, Georg Kosakowski b, Olaf Kolditz a,c
a Helmholtz Center for Environmental Research - UFZ, Leipzig, Germany
b Paul Scherrer Institut - PSI, Villigen, Switzerland
c Technical University of Dresden, Dresden, Germany
article info
Article history:
Received 4 January 2008
Received in revised form
21 April 2008
Accepted 23 July 2008
Keywords:
Parallel computing
Finite element method
Domain decomposition
Thermo-hydro-mechanical (THM) coupled
processes
Porous media
abstract
Many applied problems in geoscience require knowledge about complex interactions between multiple
physical and chemical processes in the sub-surface. As a direct experimental investigation is often not
possible, numerical simulation is a common approach. The numerical analysis of coupled thermo-
hydro-mechanical (THM) problems is computationally very expensive, and therefore the applicability of
existing codes is still limited to simpliﬁed problems. In this paper we present a novel implementation of
a parallel ﬁnite element method (FEM) for the numerical analysis of coupled THM problems in porous
media. The computational task of the FEM is partitioned into sub-tasks by a priori domain
decomposition. The sub-tasks are assigned to the CPU nodes concurrently. Parallelization is achieved
by simultaneously establishing the sub-domain mesh topology, synchronously assembling linear
equation systems in sub-domains and obtaining the overall solution with a sub-domain linear solver
(parallel BiCGStab method with Jacobi pre-conditioner). The present parallelization method is
implemented in an object-oriented way using MPI for inter-processor communication. The parallel
code was successfully tested with a 2-D example from the international DECOVALEX benchmarking
project. The achieved speed-up for a 3-D extension of the test example on different computers
demonstrates the advantage of the present parallel scheme.
& 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
The numerical analysis of multi-ﬁeld problems in porous
media is an important subject for many geo-engineering tasks
such as the management of geo-resources (e.g. engineering of
geothermal, oil and gas reservoirs) as well as waste management
(e.g. chemo-toxic and nuclear waste, CO 2 sequestration) (Doughty
and Pruess, 2004; Stephansson et al., 2004; Alonso et al., 2005 ).
For instance, the functional integrity of nuclear waste repositories
in the deep geologic underground is inﬂuenced by several
interfering physical and chemical processes. A typical concept
for deep geological disposal of high level radioactive waste is
based on a combination of technical and natural barriers. Steel or
copper waste containers are placed in emplacement tunnels and
the void space is backﬁlled with bentonite. The emplacement
tunnels are located in host rocks like clay or salt that hinder water
movement and migration of radionuclides. Due to the depth of the
disposal system, considerable overburden loads accompanied by
large lithostatic stresses are possible. Moreover, radioactive waste
emplacements like spent fuel will generate heat for relatively long
times. Therefore, thermo-hydro-mechanical (THM) phenomena
are very important to consider in those geological environments
(Tsang, 1991; Stephansson et al., 2004 ). Normally, liquid phase
ﬂow is very slow in intact very low-permeable host rocks.
However, even in such an environment, vapor ﬂow can develop
due to artiﬁcially induced thermal gradients caused by heat
emitting waste forms ( Olivella and Gens, 2000 ). Gas phases might
be produced due to the local heating of the formation water close
to hot waste canisters or as a result of chemical reactions during
canister corrosion. The mechanical behavior of host rock and
buffer materials for waste isolation, such as bentonites, can be
considerably altered under variably saturated and non-isothermal
conditions. Visco-elasto-plastic material behavior needs to be
addressed in the mechanical analysis of engineered barrier/waste
systems in salt rock ( Wallner et al., 2007 ). Moisture changes in
buffer materials, such as bentonite, results in swelling/shrinking
effects which have a large impact to the mechanical stability of
the corresponding host-rock/engineered barrier/waste system
(Xie et al., 2004; Rutqvist et al., 2005b). In return, thermal and
hydraulic processes can cause signiﬁcant mechanical damage in
the near ﬁeld of the host rock formations. A fully coupled THM
analysis is required to gain appropriate understanding of the
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cageo
Computers & Geosciences
0098-3004/$ - see front matter & 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.cageo.2008.07 .007
/C3Corresponding author.
E-mail address: wenqing.wang@ufz.de (W. Wang).
Computers & Geosciences 35 (2009) 1631–1641

--- Page 2 ---
complex process interactions in the near ﬁeld of chemo-toxic and
nuclear waste repositories ( Tsang, 1991 ). Therefore, for the
evaluation of possible scenarios, long-term predictions, and safety
assessments, numerical modeling tools are increasingly used. In
the past decade, many efforts have been done for numerically
solving THM problems by different research groups ( Rutqvist
et al., 2005a; Sanavia et al., 2006; Wang and Kolditz, 2007 );
especially in the framework of the DECOVALEX ( http://www.
decovalex.com) and the BAMBUS projects.
From the mathematics point of view, THM processes lead to a
coupled initial-boundary-value-problem (IBVP) which needs to be
solved numerically. Among the available numerical methods, the
ﬁnite element method (FEM) is mainly used ( Noorishad et al.,
1984; Kohl, 1992; Lewis and Schreﬂer, 1998; Rutqvist et al., 2001a;
Ehlers and Bluhm, 2002; de Boer, 2005 ). Irrespective of the
speciﬁc numerical method the computation of coupled THM
problems is very expensive. This is mainly due to two reasons:
degree of freedom (i.e. number of ﬁeld variables) and strong
nonlinearity. There are several ways to improve the computational
efﬁciency, e.g. more efﬁcient numerical algorithms, optimization
of memory management in the code, and parallelization techni-
ques. Among them, parallel computing provides the most power-
ful speed-up. Thanks to the decreasing hardware cost in the past
years, the parallel computation is getting very attractive for
research in computer science ( Salinger et al., 1994; Topping and
Khan, 1996; Fujisawa et al., 2003; Shioya and Yagawa, 2005;
Tezduyar and Sameh, 2006 ).
Only little work has been published so far about the parallel
ﬁnite element analysis of THM coupled problems in porous
media. Parallel computations have been conducted previously
only on small clusters with up to eight CPU nodes ( Wang and
Schreﬂer, 1998; Schreﬂer et al., 2000; Thomas et al., 2003 ).
Previously developed codes make use of the sub-structuring
technique for parallelization. This approach is based on the
following steps: (1) divide the system into different sub-structur-
ing levels, which consist of several element cells or super-
elements, (2) condense the terms associated with internal
nodal points in the sub-structure level assembly, (3) parallel
assemble local condensed equation systems at sub-structures, (4)
assemble a condensed global equation system with unknowns
only associated with sub-structure interface nodes and then solve
the problem in a so-called multi-front manner, (5) recover
internal unknowns using the condensed equations.
This paper presents a novel parallel scheme which is entirely
based on the domain decomposition concept (DDC). To this
purpose, the numerical calculation for each individual T/H/M
process is partitioned by the a priori decomposition of the ﬁnite
element mesh into sub-domains. All sub-domain related opera-
tions are assigned to the involved CPUs concurrently. The object-
oriented parallelization of the ﬁnite element scheme for each
T/H/M process is realized in three major steps: (1) concurrently
establish sub-domain mesh topology for both linear and quadratic
interpolations, (2) simultaneously assemble linear equation
systems in sub-domains, (3) obtain the overall solution by using
sub-domain linear equation solver. For step (3), a Jacobi
preconditioned BiCGStab linear solver is implemented. The
matrix–vector multiplications, which are the basic computational
operations of the solver algorithm, are performed at sub-domain
level by all involved CPUs concurrently. Finally, the overall
numerical solutions for the entire domain are updated by inter-
processor communications. It is important to note that this
parallel scheme completely avoids the assembly of a global
equation system. All equation assemblies are restricted to sub-
domain level.
The paper is structured as follows. The mathematical formula-
tion of the THM problem as well as the corresponding ﬁnite
element scheme are brieﬂy described in Sections 2 and 3,
respectively. Details of the parallelization method are given in
Section 4 which also includes some aspects of the object-oriented
implementation in the framework of the open-source scientiﬁc
software GeoSys/RockFlow. The speed-up of the parallelization
method is presented together with 2-D and 3-D THM numerical
simulations in Section 5.
2. Mechanics of THM coupled processes
The governing equations of coupled THM problems are
brieﬂy summarized in this section. The physical processes
involved are non-isothermal unsaturated ﬂow, heat transport,
and poro-elasto-plastic deformation. The corresponding ﬁeld
variables of the multi-ﬁeld problem are liquid phase pressure p,
temperature T, and displacement vector u. More details on THM
mechanics can be found e.g. in Lewis and Schreﬂer (1998) ,
Rutqvist et al. (2001a) , and Wang and Kolditz (2007) .
2.1. Non-isothermal unsaturated ﬂow in a deformable porous
medium
We apply an extended Richards model for the description of
non-isothermal ﬂow in unsaturated deformable porous media.
The applicability of the Richards approximation for the selected
examples (Section 5) was justiﬁed by in previous work ( Kolditz
and de Jonge, 2004; Wang et al., 2007 ). According to the extended
Darcy law for unsaturated ﬂow ( Bear and Bachmat, 1991 ) the
macroscopic liquid phase ﬂow due to pressure gradients,
capillarity, and gravity is deﬁned as
q
w ¼/C0 nS rw
krelk
m ðrp /C0 rwgÞ
/C18/C19
(1)
where n is effective porosity, S is water saturation, rw is water
density, krel is relative permeability function, k is saturated
permeability tensor, m is water viscosity, p is water pressure
(ﬁeld variable of ﬂow process), g is gravity acceleration
vector.
In addition to classic Darcian processes, vapor ﬂow effects
have to be considered in non-isothermal systems. Hereby, we
directly adopt the ﬂux and mass balance equations derived by
Rutqvist et al. (2001a) :
qv ¼/C0 Dpvrp /C0 f TvDTvrT (2)
where T is local equilibrium temperature of the porous medium,
f T v is thermal diffusion enhancement factor. Dpv and DTv are
hydraulic and thermal diffusion coefﬁcients,
Dpv ¼ Dvrv
rwRT
DTv ¼ Dv y qrvS
qT /C0 rvp
rwRT2
 !
(3)
Dv is vapor diffusion coefﬁcient, rv is vapor density, y is relative
humidity deﬁned as
y ¼ ep=rw RT (4)
with the speciﬁc gas constant for water vapor R. rvS is the
saturated vapor density given by an empirical function ( Rutqvist
et al., 2001a )
rvS ¼ 10/C0 3e19:891/C0 4975=T (5)
which is related to vapor density by the expression rv ¼ yrvS.
Darcy ﬂux (1) and, additionally, the vapor ﬂux term (2) are
inserted in the ﬂuid mass balance equation, which yields the
ARTICLE IN PRESS
W. Wang et al. / Computers & Geosciences 35 (2009) 1631–16411632

--- Page 3 ---
following ﬁeld equation for water pressure:
n rw /C0 rv
rw
qS
qp þ Sbp þð 1 /C0 SÞ rv
r2
wRT
/C20/C21 qp
qt
þ r /C1ð qw þ qvÞ=rw þ S q
qt ðr /C1 uÞ
n 1 /C0 S
rw
y qrvS
qT þ rvP
RT2
/C18/C19 qT
qt ¼ 0 (6)
where bp is a hydraulic storativity coefﬁcient of the porous
medium.
2.2. Poro-thermo-elastic deformation
Deformation processes are described by the momentum
balance equation of the porous medium in the terms of stress as
r /C1ð r /C0 SpI /C0 aEDTIÞþ rg ¼ 0 (7)
where r is the effective stress of the porous medium, a is the
thermal expansion coefﬁcient, E is the young’s modulus, and I is
the identity tensor. The density of the porous medium is
composed by three phases, liquid, gas, and solids r ¼ nSrw þ
nð1 /C0 SÞrg þð 1 /C0 nÞrs with rw, the liquid, rg , the gas and rs, the
solid densities, respectively.
2.3. Heat transport in a unsaturated porous medium
The heat ﬂux in an unsaturated porous medium is composed
by diffusive and advective parts
qT ¼/C0 krT þ nSrwcwvT (8)
where k ¼ nSkw þ nð1 /C0 SÞkg þð 1 /C0 nÞks is the heat conductivity
of the porous medium. kw, kg and ks are the heat conductivities of
water, gas and solid phase, respectively. v is liquid phase velocity.
With the deﬁnition of heat ﬂux (8), the governing equation for
heat transport in a porous medium is given by
cr qT
qt /C0 rqT ¼ Q T (9)
where cr ¼ nScwrw þ nð1 /C0 SÞcg rg þð 1 /C0 nÞcsrs is the heat capa-
city of the porous medium. cw, cg , cs are the speciﬁc heat
capacities of liquid, gas and solid phases, respectively. Q T is a heat
source term.
3. Finite element formulation
The method of weighted residuals ( Lewis and Schreﬂer, 1998 )
is applied to derive the weak formulation of the governing
equations for water ﬂow (6), deformation (7), and heat transport
processes (9) given in Section 2.
Water ﬂow —H process :
Z
O
n ðrw /C0 rvÞ qS
qp þ Sbprw þð 1 /C0 SÞ rv
rwRT
/C20/C21 qp
qt o dO
/C0
Z
O
qw /C1 ro dO þ
Z
G
qwno dG
þ
Z
O
rqvo dO þ
Z
O
Srw
q
qt ðr /C1 uÞo dO
þ
Z
O
nð1 /C0 SÞ y qrvS
qT þ rvp
RT2
/C18/C19 qT
qt o dO ¼ 0 (10)
Deformation—M process :
Z
O
1
2 ðr /C0 SpI /C0 aEDTIÞ : ðrx þð rxÞTÞ dO /C0
Z
O
xT /C1 rg dO
/C0
Z
G
xT /C1 t dG ¼ 0 (11)
Heat transport —T process :
Z
O
cr qT
qt o dO /C0
Z
O
qT /C1 ro dO
þ
Z
G
qT /C1 no dG /C0
Z
O
Q T o dO ¼ 0 (12)
Here o 2 V1 /C26 H1
GðOÞ1 is the linear test function, and x 2 Vn /C26
H1
GðOÞn is the quadratic test function in n-dimensional space. O
denotes the model domain with G as domain boundary, where
boundary conditions have to be speciﬁed for all ﬁeld functions p,
T, and u, respectively. A Galerkin method is used to discretize the
weak forms (10)–(12) of the THM balance equations. Time
discretization is accomplished through implicit ﬁnite difference
schemes. All variables are approximated by admissible interpola-
tion functions in the Taylor–Hood ﬁnite element space. Achieving
a reasonable numerical stability and accuracy requires the use of
linear interpolation functions for pressure and temperature
variables and quadratic interpolation functions for displacement
variables ( Korsawe et al., 2006 ).
We consider the staggered method to handle the coupling
terms of the balance equations. As a consequence, the coupling
terms are treated as right-hand side (RHS) terms. The staggered
scheme of the THM coupled problem may be brieﬂy written as
MT T0 þ KT T ¼ fT ðpÞ
MH p0 þ KH p ¼ fH ðT; uÞ
MM u ¼
Z
O
B dOT DBu ¼ fM ðp; TÞ (13)
where T, p and u are the primary node variables of temperature,
water pressure and displacements. f is the speciﬁc RHS term
containing the contributions of the coupled processes, B is the
strain displacement matrix, and D is the elasto-plastic constitu-
tive tensor. M and K are process-speciﬁc mass and Laplace
matrices given by
M ¼
Z
O
NMNT dO
K ¼
Z
O
rNKðrNÞT dO (14)
M and K are material tensors. The solution of the THM coupled
nonlinear problem (13) is obtained by using a combination of
Picard and Newton–Raphson schemes ( Wang and Kolditz, 2007 ).
More detailed information on the ﬁnite element approach of THM
coupled problems can be found e.g. in Lewis and Schreﬂer (1998) .
4. Parallelization method
In this section we describe the parallelization concept for the
numerical solution of the THM coupled problem formulated in Eq.
(13). Basically, the present parallelization method is based upon
the DDC. Domain decomposition is used to split the topological
discretization of whole model domain (i.e. ﬁnite element mesh)
into several sub-domains. Then the ﬁnite element contributions
are assembled for each of those sub-domains. Finally the sub-
domain contributions are reconciled to obtain a solution of the
original problem for the whole domain.
In general, the parallelization concept consists of following
three basic steps: (1) domain decomposition (Section 4.1), (2)
partitioning of global assembly of the algebraic equation systems;
i.e. assembly of local sub-domain matrices A
k
i and vectors xk
i of
each process k ¼ T; H; M (Section 4.2), where i is the number of
sub-domains, and (3) partitioning of the global linear solver
(Section 4.3).
We consider geometric parallelism. This means that all CPU
nodes of a parallel machine run the same code for the existing
ARTICLE IN PRESS
W. Wang et al. / Computers & Geosciences 35 (2009) 1631–1641 1633

--- Page 4 ---
domain decomposition. The major simulation procedure for each
CPU node i is summarized into a pseudo-code provided in Fig. 1.
Procedures that were parallelized are the construction of the
sub-domain mesh topology, assembly of the sub-domain equation
systems, and the linear solver. Actually, the communication
among the CPU nodes is only required in the linear solver
algorithm.
4.1. Domain decomposition
There are two basic approaches for domain decomposition in
use, the Schwarz-method with sub-domains overlapping with
each other, and the Schur-complement-method with sub-domains
being separated by distinct interfaces ( Przemieniecki, 1985; Lions,
1989; Carey, 1989; Farhat and Roux, 1991, 1992 ). The latter is
adopted for the present study in order to assure that the assembly
of element matrices and vectors is restricted to sub-domains. The
iterative Krylov subspace equation solver only performs local sub-
domain matrix–vector multiplications, and, therefore, less inter-
processor communication is required. Usually, the domain
decomposition is conducted a priori using existing tools such as
Jostle (Walshaw et al., 1997; Soper et al., 2004 ) or METIS ( Karypis
et al., 1998). These tools minimize the number of border nodes of
the sub-domains. This is important for ensuring an optimal load
balance and it reduces communication latency during parallel
computing ( Kemmler et al., 2005 ).
The domain decomposition procedure is realized as follows:
(1) Partitioning of the global ﬁnite element mesh into a number
of sub-domains Oi. Usually, the number of sub-domains
corresponds to the number of available CPU nodes of the
parallel machine. Those sub-domain data contain global
element indices as well as internal and border nodes of the
sub-domain.
(2) Reading of the ﬁnite element mesh (MSH ﬁle) and of the sub-
domain data (DDC ﬁle).
(3) Computation of the local ﬁnite element topology and
local–global mapping relations for each sub-domain Oi in a
parallel manner. This ensures that the local matrices Ai and
vectors xi can be easily assembled afterwards.
4.2. Partitioning of global assembly
The basic concept of parallelization is to split the global
equation system into a number of sub-systems, which are denoted
as local equation systems hereafter. This partitioning procedure is
conducted according to the domain decomposition (Section 4.1). It
is based completely on sub-domain mesh topology. These sub-
systems are cast to a number of processors (CPU nodes)
concurrently. Applying this technique to the FEM leads to a so-
called sub-structuring technique of domain decomposition ( Far-
hat and Roux, 1991, 1992 ). The most important operation for
domain decomposition data is the mapping of global to local data
and vice versa. That way, local equation systems are established
by assembling matrices and vectors, such as M, K and f for each
ﬁnite element and each T/H/M process.
Consider the element mesh of the entire domain
O is
decomposed into m sub-domains, O ¼ O0 [ O1 [/C1/C1/C1[ Om for the
THM coupled ﬁnite element problem (13). Local equation systems
are assembled in these sub-domains with corresponding sub-
domain mesh topology and with respect to the initial and
boundary conditions. The stiffness matrices A and RHS vectors b
are therefore split into blocks related to sub-domain Oi
Ap
i p ¼ bp
i
AT
i T ¼ bT
i
Au
i u ¼ bu
i ; i ¼ 1; ...; m (15)
where Ap
i , AT
i and Au
i
are sub-domain stiffness matrices, bp
i , bT
i and
bu
i
are sub-domain RHS vectors of ﬂuid ﬂow, heat transport and
deformation processes, respectively. The assembly of Ap
i , AT
i , Au
i
, bp
i ,
bT
i , bu
i
can be easily conducted on different CPU nodes concur-
rently. The parallel assembly of local equation systems is
illustrated in Fig. 2 . All required operations, including memory
allocations, are managed by each CPU node itself. At this stage
inter-processor communication is not yet required.
4.3. Partitioning of global linear solver
The most difﬁcult and challenging part of the parallelization
task is the solution of the global equation system. We modiﬁed an
iterative Krylov solver method for this purpose. Technically, the
Krylov method is based on performing a series of products of
the system matrix A with several vectors. As a result of the
parallelization concept (cf. Section 4.1), these matrix–vector-
multiplications can be carried out completely at sub-domain
level, i.e. for sub-domain matrix A
i and vectors bi in the different
processors concurrently
Ak
i xk
i ; k ¼ p; T or u
Important for these local matrix–vector-multiplications is,
whether the entries of local matrices and vectors are associated
with border nodes or with internal nodes of a sub-domain. If the
components of local matrices and vectors are associated with sub-
domain border nodes, inter-processor communication is con-
ducted during collection of the norm of kA
k
i xk
i k and during
updating the iteration step solutions. Technically, the message
passing interface (MPI) function MPI_Allreduce(y) is adopted
to collect the required data from the different CPU nodes.
In case of sparse linear systems it is possible to accelerate the
convergence of the iterative Krylov method by employing a left
pre-conditioner M. The modiﬁed equation system is given by
M
/C0 1Ax ¼ M/C0 1b (16)
We apply a Jacobian pre-conditioner in two steps. At ﬁrst, the
diagonal entries of the local system matrix are computed
according to
M
a
i ¼
ðaklÞa
i if k ¼ l;
0i f kal;
(
a ¼ p; T or u
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig. 1. THM simulation procedure for each processor.
Fig. 2. Parallel assembly scheme of local equation systems.
W. Wang et al. / Computers & Geosciences 35 (2009) 1631–16411634

--- Page 5 ---
where Aa
i :¼ðaklÞa
i . Secondly, the entries which are associated with
border nodes of adjacent sub-domains are accumulated. These
operations require inter-processor communications.
4.4. Outline of the parallel scheme
The parallelization of the ﬁnite element for the solution of
THM problems is conducted with MPI. Based on the geometric
parallelization concept outlined in Section 4, all CPUs run the
same code during program execution. The major simulation steps
for each processor (CPU node i) are presented as pseudo-code in
Fig. 1. A schematic of the parallel ﬁnite element analysis of the
THM coupled problems including inter-processor communication
is illustrated in Fig. 3 . Using the parallelization scheme as
described in Sections 4.1–4.3, the assembly of the global system
of equations can be completely avoided. The parallelization
scheme ensures an efﬁcient load balance between the CPU nodes
as long as the domain is well partitioned.
4.5. Accuracy
In this section we prove that the parallel scheme is not loosing
accuracy with increasing number of involved CPU nodes. In
particular we show that the accuracy of the parallel solution
algorithm of the linear equation is not decaying. In the
parallelization scheme we have to partition the algebraic equation
system (13) and then collect the overall solution in the linear
solver scheme. We explain the method and its impact on the
accuracy for the case of two partitions. We ﬁrst assume the
algebraic equation can be written in the general form of Eq. (15)
Ax ¼ b. Our target is to minimize krk¼k b /C0 Axk in order to get a
solution. When the equation is partitioned into two domains (by
local assembly in FEM), we split it into
r
1
r1
b
 !
¼
b1
b1
b
 !
/C0
A11 A1b
Ab1 A1
bb
 ! x1
x1
b
 !
r2
r2
b
 !
¼
b2
b2
b
 !
/C0
A22 A2b
Ab2 A2
bb
 ! x2
x2
b
 !
where x ¼ð x1; xb; x2ÞT, b ¼ð b1; bb; b2ÞT and r ¼ð r1; rb; r2ÞT with
subscript b denotes border node related entries. The partitioning
scheme has to ensure that
bb ¼ b1
b þ b2
1
Moreover the local domain assembly guarantees the collection of
the residual as
rb ¼ b1
b þ b2
b
/C0 Ab1x1 /C0 A1
bbx1
b /C0 Ab2x2 /C0 A2
bbx2
b
Therefore, the accuracy of the solution method does not depend on
the number of domain decompositions. However, there may be an
accumulation of truncation errors from the iterative solver. This
would result in little differences between solutions with different
numbers of sub-domains. We show this effect for the 3-D THM
example in Section 5.2.3 and demonstrate that the resulting error is
very small, normally in the range of the iterative solver tolerance.
4.6. Efﬁciency
CPU clock time and wall clock time can be used to evaluate the
efﬁciency of a parallel scheme. Since the present parallel scheme
is based on geometric parallelism, the overall simulation time is
measured when the execution on all computer nodes is ﬁnished.
The CPU time includes user time for instructions and cache, as
well as system time for initiating I/O, paging exceptions and
memory allocation. It has a rather low temporal resolution
(typically
1
100 second). CPU time is an appropriate measure to
evaluate the performance of the entire program on a shared
system. The wall time is the elapsed time, which includes CPU
time, communication time and the time needed to release
computer or network resources after execution is ﬁnished. It
should be noted that the wall time is also inﬂuenced by speciﬁc
hardware features, such as speed and bandwidth of the node-to-
node connections. The difference between CPU time and wall
clock time will vary on different hardware and software platforms.
In this paper we use both CPU clock time and wall clock time to
evaluate the performance of the present parallel scheme.
4.7. Computer platforms
The computations were performed at two different platforms:
CRAY XT3 and SUN X4600 parallel machines. The CRAY XT3 at the
Swiss Super Computing Centre (CSCS) is based on AMD x86_64
O p t e r o nC P U sw i t h2o r4 G Ba c c e s s i b l em e m o r yf o re a c hC P Un o d e .
T h ee n t i r eX T 3c o m p u t es y s t e mc o n s i s t so f1 6 6 4d u a lc o r en o d e s
giving 3328 compute CPU nodes, subdivided into 416 compute
blades. The whole machine has a peak performance of 17.30
TeraFlops and in total 3.3 TeraBytes of RAM are accessible. Each
Opteron processor is directly connected to a dedicated Cray SeaStar
chip. Each SeaStar contains a 6-Port router and communications
engine and also provides a serial connection to the Cray RAS and
management system. The SUN X4600 cluster at UFZ is used for
development and testing of parallel codes. It consists of AMD x86_64
based processor nodes, each equipped with 8 x Opteron 885 and 8 GB
of RAM per CPU. A total of 80 CPU and 320 GB of RAM give an HPL
based peak performance of 238 GFlops. All nodes are connected via
low-latency 10 GBit-Inﬁniband with 1 GBit-Ethernet-Interconnect.
Both platforms are based on x86_64 Opteron nodes, but the
node interconnection speed is different. The technical differences
of the platforms are important for the achieved speed-up, as we
will see in Section 5.2.2.
5. Parallel computation results
As application example for the present parallel FEM scheme
we consider the simulation of THM coupled processes in a
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig. 3. Schematic of the parallel ﬁnite element method.
W. Wang et al. / Computers & Geosciences 35 (2009) 1631–1641 1635

--- Page 6 ---
geotechnical repository system. The present numerical model was
developed in the framework of the international code comparison
project DECOVALEX-THMC (an acronym for DEvelopment of
COupled models and their VALidation against EXperiments) ( Barr
et al., 2004 ). This project was dedicated to the analysis of THMC
processes (the C stands for geochemical processes) for nuclear
waste depository scenarios in different geological environments.
The particular ‘‘Task-D’’ benchmark test is based on experimental
data obtained in the Grimsel (Switzerland) and Yucca-Mountain
(US) test sites. The experiments were aimed at gaining a better
understanding of basic processes such as the effect of THM
processes on porosity and permeability changes. For this purpose
two 2D-test cases have been originally deﬁned ( Rutqvist et al.,
2008).
The contents of this section is twofold. First, the results of the
original 2-D ‘‘Task-D’’ test are given and compared to other codes
(Section 5.1). Second, a 3-D extension of the ‘‘Task-D’’ test example
demonstrates the efﬁciency and the limitations of the present
parallel scheme for complex THM problems (Section 5.2).
5.1. Veriﬁcation example (2-D)
5.1.1. Deﬁnition
Fig. 4 depicts the deﬁnition of the DECOVALEX-THMC ‘‘TASK-
D’’ test case as a concept of a buffer system to isolate radioactive
waste in crystalline rock. The waste canister is installed into a drift
and sealed with bentonite. The drift is embedded in fully
saturated rock at a depth of 500 m below ground surface. Since
the surrounding crystalline rock is assumed to be fully saturated,
water may leak into the initially ‘‘dry’’ bentonite, which leads to
swelling of the buffer material. The radioactive waste will heat the
bentonite buffer, as well as the surrounding rock for a relatively
long time. Therefore, the understanding of the fully coupled THM
processes in a long-term period is very important for safety
assessment.
The geometry of the 2-D model domain is illustrated in Fig. 4 .
Material parameters for host rock and bentonite buffer were
chosen according to the DECOVALEX TASK D deﬁnition ( Barr et al.,
2004). Particular soil–water-characteristic functions are used for
the description of the hydraulic behavior of the partially saturated
porous materials. To mimic the heat emission of the radioactive
waste, a time-dependent heat power function is applied as
thermal source term. Boundary conditions applied for ﬂow,
deformation, and heat transport processes are shown in Fig. 4 .
Further details of the case study deﬁnition can be found in
Rutqvist et al. (2008).
5.1.2. Results
The 2-D THM simulations have been used for veriﬁcation and
testing of the parallel scheme. We systematically tested the
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig. 4. Deﬁnition of the DECOVALEX-THMC ‘‘TASK-D’’ test case (Barr et al., 2004).
W. Wang et al. / Computers & Geosciences 35 (2009) 1631–16411636

--- Page 7 ---
individual T/H/M processes in the beginning, and then increased
complexity step-by-step by adding the different process cou-
plings. The sequential computation served as a reference solution
and was used to test the correct implementation of the parallel
scheme (see also Section 5.2.3 for discussion of accuracy). We
would like to stress, that we did not ﬁnd signiﬁcant differences
between the serial and parallel solutions. Within the testing
procedure sequential and parallel simulations with 2–20 decom-
posed domains have been compared.
In addition, we present selected results of the code comparison
study that was conducted within the DECOVALEX TASK D. Fig. 5
shows the temperature evolution at selected observation points, a
result of the code-to-code comparison between the THM codes of
the DECOVALEX project, ROCMAS ( Rutqvist et al., 2001a ), TOUGH-
FLAC ( Rutqvist et al., 2001b ), THAMES ( Chijimatsu et al., 2000 ),
FRT-THM (Liu et al., 2006 ) and the present parallel code GeoSys/
RockFlow.
5.1.3. Efﬁciency
In this section we do a ﬁrst analysis of the efﬁciency of the
parallel scheme, which in general depends on the following
factors: problem size, hardware and software effects.
The speed-up for a 2-D THM simulation based on wall clock
time measurements on the SUN X4600 cluster is shown in Fig. 6 .
We would like to note that the problem size with 1720 nodes and
3152 is rather small. A nearly optimal speed-up can be achieved
for up to 16 CPU nodes, then the parallel efﬁciency goes down. We
found that the most important factor is the behavior of the linear
solver, which was also reported by Ouarraui and Kaeli (2004) .
Since there is inter-computer-node communication in the parallel
solver algorithm, an increasing number of iterations causes larger
communication latency. Therefore, the overall speed-up is
affected by the number of solver iterations. The inter-computer-
node communication takes place on border mesh nodes during
each solver iteration and once on all mesh nodes after solver
convergence is achieved. The number of border mesh nodes is
monotonically increasing with the number of sub-domains. If the
number of border mesh nodes becomes close to the overall
number of the mesh nodes, the communication between border
nodes will limit the speed-up. In other words, if we decompose a
mesh into too many sub-domains, we cannot achieve a further
speed-up for the parallel simulation.
5.2. Demonstration example (3-D)
5.2.1. Deﬁnition
The original DECOVALEX TASK-D problem (Fig. 4) was designed
to study long-term effects concerning possible saturation–stress–
temperature redistribution resulting from waste deposition. With
the help of a 3-D demonstration example we investigate spatial
THM processes in the near ﬁeld of a hypothetical repository. We
construct the 3-D model by cutting out a zone of about 100 m
from the original 2-D model ( Fig. 4 ). The 2-D vertical domain is
then expanded horizontally into the y-direction to produce the 3-
D model. In order to assign correct boundary conditions in the 3-D
model we use results of the 2-D simulation for the corresponding
bounding surfaces. The outline and the mesh of the 3-D THM
demonstration problem is shown in Fig. 7.
The 3-D domain is discretized into 66 900 tetrahedra with
12 485 element nodes for thermal (T) as well as hydraulic (H)
processes (using linear elements) and with 94 215 nodes for the
deformation (M) process (using quadratic elements). The mesh is
partitioned into 2–100 sub-domains for parallel simulations in
order to conduct speed-up measurements. Decomposed domains
are depicted in different colors ( Fig. 7 ).
5.2.2. Results
Results of the parallel 3-D THM computations are shown in
Fig. 8 . THM processes are represented by the distributions of the
ﬁeld variables, saturation (non-isothermal unsaturated ﬂow),
temperature (heat transport), and stress (thermo-mechanical
deformation).
In order to obtain speed-up curves for the parallel scheme, we
conducted simulation runs with different numbers of domain
decompositions on the CRAY XT3 and SUN X4600 platforms. The
technical features are explained in Section 4.7. On the CRAY XT3,
the sequential simulation consumed a wall time of 4468 s. The
wall time decreased to 132 s for the parallel simulation with 100
CPUs. For all simulations performed on the CRAY XT3, the longest
CPU time was identical to the wall clock time. On the newly
available SUN X4600, we could use up to 64 CPUs for the parallel
simulations. For the sequential reference simulation a wall time of
4598 s was required, which is close to the computation time on
the
CRAY XT3. Unlike the parallel runs on the CRAY XT3, the
wall clock time on the SUN X4600 does not match the longest
CPU time.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig. 5. Temporal evolution of temperature at given observation points (V1: at
canister surface, V2: in drift at rock surface, V6: 12.5 m into rock) (Rutqvist et al.,
2008).
Number of CPUs
Speedup
5
0
5
10
15
20
10 15 20
Fig. 6. Speed-up of parallel 2-D THM simulations on a SUN X4600 cluster.
W. Wang et al. / Computers & Geosciences 35 (2009) 1631–1641 1637

--- Page 8 ---
The speed-up behavior achieved on both platforms is illu-
strated in Fig. 9. We clearly see that on CRAY XT3 the longest CPU
time is identical to the wall clock time. In contrast on SUN X4600,
we observe that the deviation between CPU and wall clock times
increases monotonically with the number of involved processors.
Since we allow I/O operation only on one processor, this time lag
is also related to the time duration needed for inter-processor-
communication as well as for locating/releasing the communica-
tion resources for the parallel computation.
In terms of longest CPU time, the simulations on both
platforms give an ideal speed-up of 1:1 for up to 24 CPUs. For
more CPUs, the communication latency is gradually increasing
which reduces speed-up. Signiﬁcant deviations between CPU and
wall clock time are observed on the X4600 platform beginning
from eight CPUs. This ‘‘parasitic consumption’’ is related to the job
management system which clearly interferes the processor
communication. Along with the increase in the number of
involved CPUs, there is a growing delay between wall and CPU
ARTICLE IN PRESS
z
-400
-200
0
200
400
x00.511.5y-10
z
00.511.5
XY
Z
Near field zoom in
Bottom boundary conditions
Top boundary conditions
2D results at here
2D results at here
Fig. 7. Mesh of 2-D example (left). Magniﬁed look at 2-D mesh (middle) with positions of trace lines which were used for extraction of boundary conditions for the 3-D
THM problem (right).
Fig. 8. Computed 3-D distributions of saturation (in m 3 =m3 ), temperature (in /C14 C) and vertical stress (in Pa) (from left to right).
W. Wang et al. / Computers & Geosciences 35 (2009) 1631–16411638

--- Page 9 ---
times. In order to investigate this phenomenon we changed the
batch system temporarily in a way to guarantee full access to all
eight Dual-Core Opteron CPUs on a processor node of the SUN
X4600 cluster. Fig. 10 shows the improvement of the wall clock
time if all CPU nodes of a processor node are exclusively used. The
discrepancies in wall time behavior shows the importance of
comparing speed-up measurements on different platforms for the
validation of parallel computations.
5.2.3. Accuracy
Finally, we examine the accuracy of the parallel scheme
(according to Section 5.2.3). In all our test cases we did not
observe great discrepancies between the serial and parallel
solutions. As a typical result we present the accumulated errors
for secondary variables. We look at a local grid point where
signiﬁcant changes for the absolute values of the state variables
are observed. First, we deﬁne the relative difference between
solutions x for the serial version (index ¼ 1) and for a parallel
version with 40 sub-domains (index ¼ 40) as e ¼ð x
1 /C0 x40Þ=x1.A t
the end of simulation, the relative difference for the main
components of the stress tensor sxx, syy, and szz are
8:433 /C2 10/C0 6,4 :7 /C2 10/C0 6 and 5 :7 /C2 10/C0 4. The difference between
serial and parallel versions is in the order of about 10 /C0 10, which is
in the order of the solver tolerance.
6. Conclusions and outlook
A parallel FEM for the numerical simulation of thermo-hydro-
mechanical (THM) coupled processes in porous media has been
developed. Although the parallelization technique itself is rather
standard, the scheme is (i) new for the parallel computation of
this class of coupled multi-ﬁeld problems (i.e. THM processes in
porous media) and (ii) it is analyzed on different medium size
platforms (up to 100 CPU nodes) for the ﬁrst time. For numerical
validation, the parallel scheme is applied to the Task-D test
example of the DECOVALEX code comparison project.
6.1. Achievements
So far, parallel THM coupled simulations have been conducted
only on small clusters with up to eight CPU nodes applying sub-
structuring technique ( Wang and Schreﬂer, 1998; Schreﬂer et al.,
2000; Thomas et al., 2003 ). The present domain decomposition
scheme is used for equation assembly and for the linear solver. To
our knowledge it is the ﬁrst time that THM coupled processes in
geosciences are solved without any global assembly of the
equation system. The iterative solver is preconditioned by a
Jacobian method. The sub-domain matrices and vectors are
directly used to compute matrix–vector-multiplications and to
obtain the overall solution of the linear equation system.
The computational speed-up was analyzed for 2-D and, in
particular, 3-D test examples on two different platforms, a CRAY
XT3 and a cluster of SUN X4600 machines. The results are
summarized in Fig. 9 . An examination of the different hardware
platforms clearly shows the importance of inter-computer-node
communication. There is almost no difference between CPU and
wall clock times on CRAY XT3 highlighting the fast connections
between all CPU nodes. For the SUN X4600 cluster we see an
increasing delay between CPU and wall clock times due to the
hardware structure. There is a fast interconnection between the
CPUs on each processor node but a slower communication
between the processor nodes.
From a practical viewpoint it is now possible to conduct 3-D
THM simulations on a 100 CPU-node conﬁguration about 36 times
faster than before with the sequential version. In other words, 36
times more numerical simulations are feasible now in the same
time for 3-D analysis of practical THM problems. Only a few
publications are available so far that present speed-up curves for
parallel simulations of similar multi-ﬁeld problems, therefore a
comprehensive classiﬁcation of the computational efﬁciency of
our parallel code is difﬁcult. The achieved speed-up of the present
scheme is at least comparable, or even better than that by
Ouarraui and Kaeli (2004) obtained on a cluster with 16 CPUs.
6.2. Deﬁciencies and future work
The speed-up curves shown in Fig. 9 , however, reveal a
problem which needs further investigation. Increasing the
number of domain decompositions (CPU nodes) will not really
improve the computational efﬁciency of the present parallel
scheme even on optimal platforms with fast interconnection
between all CPU nodes. The saturation of speed-up for the
selected test case starts at about 50 CPU nodes for the 3-D-
example. Of course the breakdown of efﬁciency will occur later for
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Number of CPUs
Speedup
20
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Longest CPU time (CrayXT3)
Wall clock time (CrayXT3)
Longest CPU time (X4600)
Wall clock time (X4600)
40 60 80 100
Fig. 9. Speed-up of 3-D THM simulations on CRAY XT3 and SUN X4600 platforms,
respectively.
Number of CPUs
Speedup
2
0
5
10
15
Longest CPU time (X4600, multi-node)
Wall clock time (X4600, multi-node)
Longest CPU time (X4600, single node)
Wall clock time (X4600, single node)
4 6 8 1 01 21 41 6
Fig. 10. Speed-up of 3-D THM simulations on SUN X4600 platform with optimized
job management.
W. Wang et al. / Computers & Geosciences 35 (2009) 1631–1641 1639

--- Page 10 ---
‘‘bigger’’ problems, but we will not be able to avoid it once we
reach a problem-size-dependent threshold. This decay of parallel
efﬁciency is caused by the increase in communication between
sub-domain border nodes if the problem is decomposed into too
many sub-domains. In order to improve the parallel efﬁciency
further, we will focus on (i) shortening the inter-computer-node
communication time by introducing non-blocking communica-
tion and on (ii) improving the data exchange scheme on border
nodes.
An important lesson learned from this study is, that software
and hardware compatibility is very important for the computa-
tional efﬁciency of parallel schemes. In a few years Peta
computing (i.e. availability of more than 10 4 CPU nodes) is
envisaged. In order to be able to use this supercomputing
technology we have to further increase the scalability of the
parallel codes for the solution of coupled multi-ﬁeld problems.
Acknowledgments
This work was funded by the Landesstiftung Baden-Wu ¨ rttem-
berg in the priority program ‘‘Modeling and simulation at high
performance computers’’ under Grant 727 and by the German
Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) under Grant 02C1 1 14.
We thank the anonymous reviewers for their careful reviews
based on which the manuscript was substantially improved. We
thank Rolf Rabenseifner, Thomas Boenisch and Andry Chut with
the Federal High Performance Computing Center in Stuttgart
(HLRS) for advising us in the parallel ‘‘things’’, including us into
the DEISA activities and starting speed-up measurements for the
THM solver on the NEC-SX8 machine at HLRS. We are very grateful
to the continuous support of our work in the ﬁeld of thermo-
hydro-mechanical-chemical (THMC) coupled processes provided
by the Federal Institute of Geosciences and Natural Resources
(BGR) in Hannover (Hua Shao, Thomas Nowak, Herbert Kunz).
Finally we acknowledge the support by Thomas Schnicke and
Thomas Wieser for setting up the parallel machine at UFZ in
Leipzig for further research and optimization of parallel comput-
ing with GeoSys/RockFlow.
References
Alonso, E.E., Alcoverro, J., Coste, F., Malinsky, L., Merrien-Soukatchoff, V., Kadiri, I.,
Nowak, T., Shao, H., Nguyen, T.S., Selvadurai, A.P.S., Armand, G., Sobolik, S.R.,
Itamura, M., Stone, C.M., Webb, S.W., Rejeb, A., Tijani, M., Maouche, Z.,
Kobayashi, A., Kurikami, H., Ito, A., Sugita, Y., Chijimatsu, M., Borgesson, L.,
Hernelind, J., Rutqvist, J., Tsang, C.F., Jussila, P., 2005. The FEBEX benchmark
test: case deﬁnition and comparison of modelling approaches. International
Journal of Rock Mechanics and Mining Sciences 42 (5–6), 61 1–638.
Barr, D., Birkholzer, J., Rutqvist, J., Sonnenthal, E., 2004. Draft description for
DECOVALEX-THMC task D: long-term permeability/porosity changes in EDZ
and near ﬁeld, due to THM and THC processes in volcanic and crystalline-
bentonite systems. Earth Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory, Berkeley, USA, 100pp.
Bear, J., Bachmat, Y., 1991. Introduction to modeling of transport phenomena in
porous media. In: Theory and Applications of Transport in Porous Media, vol. 4.
Kluwer Academic Publisher, Boston, USA, 553pp.
Carey, G.F., 1989. Parallel Supercomputing: Methods, Algorithms and Applications.
Wiley, New York, USA, 298pp.
Chijimatsu, M., Fujita, T., Kobayashi, A., Nakano, M., 2000. Experiment and
validation of numerical simulation of coupled thermal, hydraulic and
mechanical behaviour in the engineered buffer materials. International Journal
of Numerical and Analytical Methods in Geomechanics 24, 403–424.
de Boer, R., 2005. Trends in Continuum Mechanics of Porous Media: Theory and
Applications of Transport in Porous Media. Springer, Heidelberg, Germany,
282pp.
Doughty, C., Pruess, K., 2004. Modeling supercritical carbon dioxide injection in
heterogeneous porous media. Vadose Zone Journal 3, 837–847.
Ehlers, W., Bluhm, J., 2002. Porous Media: Theory, Experiments and Numerical
Applications. Springer, Berlin, Germany, 459pp.
Farhat, C., Roux, F., 1991. A method of ﬁnite element tearing and interconnecting
and its parallel solution algorithm. International Journal for Numerical
Methods in Engineering 32 (6), 1205–1227.
Farhat, C., Roux, F., 1992. An unconventional domain decomposition method for an
efﬁcient parallel solution of large-scale ﬁnite element systems. SIAM Journal
on Scientiﬁc and Statistical Computing 13 (1), 379–396.
Fujisawa, T., Inaba, M., Yagawa, G., 2003. Parallel computing of high-speed
compressible ﬂows using a node-based ﬁnite-element method. International
Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering 58 (3), 481–51 1.
Karypis, G., Schloegel, K., Kumar, V., 1998. Parallel graph partitioning and sparse
matrix ordering library, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, USA, 29pp
hhttp://glaros.dtc.umn.edu/gkhome/fetch/sw/parmetis/manual.pdfi.
Kemmler, D., Wang, W., Adamidis, P., Bauer, S., Kolditz, O., 2005. Solving
Coupled Geoscience Problems on High Performance Computing Platforms.
In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 3515. Springer, Berlin, Germany,
pp. 1064–1071.
Kohl, T., 1992. Modellsimulation gekoppelter Vorga ¨ nge beim Wa¨ rmeentzug aus
heißem Tiefengestein (Simulation of coupled processes in hot deep rock during
heat extraction). Ph.D. Dissertation, No. 9802, ETH Zu¨ rich, Zurich, Switzerland,
149pp.
Kolditz, O., de Jonge, J., 2004. Non-isothermal two-phase ﬂow in low-permeable
porous media. Computational Mechanics 33 (5), 345–364.
Korsawe, J., Starke, G., Wang, W., Kolditz, O., 2006. Finite element analysis of poro-
elastic consolidation in porous media: mixed and standard approaches.
Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 195 (9–12),
1096–1 1 15.
Lewis, R.W., Schreﬂer, B.A., 1998. The Finite Element Method in the Static and
Dynamic Deformation and Consolidation of Porous Media, second ed. Wiley,
New York, USA, 508pp.
Lions, P.L., 1989. On the Schwarz alternating method III: a variant of non-
overlapping subdomains. In: Proceedings of the 3rd International Symposium
on Domain Decomposition Methods for Partial Differential Equations. SIAM,
Philadelphia, Houston, USA, pp. 202–223 (Chapter 5).
Liu, Q., Zhang, C., Liu, X., 2006. A practical method for coupled THM simulations of
the Yucca Mountain and FEBEX case examples for task D of the DECOVALEX-
THMC project. In: Proceedings of GEOPROC 2006, 2nd International Sympo-
sium on Coupled THMC Processes in Geosystems and Engineering. HoHai
University, Nanjing, China, pp. 220–225.
Noorishad, J., Tsang, C., Witherspoon, P., 1984. Coupled thermal-hydraulic-
mechanical phenomena in saturated fractured porous rocks: numerical
approach. Journal of Geophysical Research 89, 10365–10373.
Olivella, S., Gens, A., 2000. Vapour transport in low permeability unsaturated soil
with capillary effects. Transport in Porous Media 40, 219–241.
Ouarraui, C., Kaeli, D., 2004. Developing object-oriented parallel iterative methods.
International Journal of High Performance Computing and Networking 1,
85–90.
Przemieniecki, J.S., 1985. Theory of Matrix Structural Analysis. McGraw Hill Book
Co., New York, USA, 480pp.
Rutqvist, J., Barr, D., Birkholzer, J.T., Chijimatsu, M., Kolditz, O., Liu, Q.,
Oda, Y., Wang, W., Zhang, C., 2008. Results from an international
simulation study on coupled thermal, hydrological, and mechanical processes
near geological nuclear waste repositories. Nuclear Technology 163 (1),
101–109.
Rutqvist, J., Barr, D., Datta, R., Gens, A., Millard, A., Olivella, S., Tsang, C.F., Tsang,
Y.W., 2005a. Coupled thermal-hydrological-mechanical analyses of the Yucca
Mountain drift scale test —comparison of ﬁeld measurements to predictions of
four different numerical models. International Journal of Rock Mechanics and
Mining Sciences 42 (5–6), 680–697.
Rutqvist, J., Bo ¨ rgesson, L., Chijimatsu, M., Kobayashi, A., Nguyen, T.S., Jing, L.,
Noorishad, J., Tsang, C.F., 2001a. Thermohydromechanics of partially saturated
geological media—governing equations and formulation of four ﬁnite element
models. International Journal of Rock Mechanics and Mining Sciences 38,
105–127.
Rutqvist, J., Chijimatsu, M., Jing, L., De Jonge, J., Kohlmeier, M., Millard, A., Nguyen,
T.S., Rejeb, A., Souley, M., Sugita, Y., Tsang, C.F., 2005b. Numerical study of the
THM effects on the near-ﬁeld safety of a hypothetical nuclear waste
repository—BMT1 of the DECOVALEX III project, Part 3: effects of THM
coupling in fractured rock. International Journal of Rock Mechanics and Mining
Sciences 42, 745–755.
Rutqvist, J., Wu, Y.S., Tsang, C.F., Bodvarsson, G., 2001b. A modeling approach for
analysis of coupled multiphase ﬂuid ﬂow, heat transfer, and deformation in
fractured porous rock. International Journal of Rock Mechanics and Mining
Sciences 39, 429–442.
Salinger, A.G., Xiao, Q., Zhou, Y., Derby, J.J., 1994. Massively parallel ﬁnite element
computations of three-dimensional, time-dependent, incompressible ﬂows in
materials processing systems. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and
Engineering 1 19 (1–2), 139–156.
Sanavia, L., Pesavento, F., Schreﬂer, B.A., 2006. Finite element analysis of non-
isothermal multiphase geomaterials with application to strain localization
simulation. Computational Mechanics 37 (4), 331–348.
Schreﬂer, B.A., Matteazzi, R., Gawin, D., Wang, X., 2000. Two parallel computing
methods for coupled thermohydromechanical problems. Computer-Aided Civil
and Infrastructure Engineering 15 (3), 1 76–188.
Shioya, R., Yagawa, G., 2005. Large-scale parallel ﬁnite-element analysis using the
internet: a performance study. International Journal for Numerical Methods in
Engineering 63 (2), 218–230.
Soper, A.J., Walshaw, C., Cross, M., 2004. A combined evolutionary search and
multilevel optimisation approach to graph partitioning. Journal of Global
Optimization 29 (2), 225–241.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
W. Wang et al. / Computers & Geosciences 35 (2009) 1631–16411640

--- Page 11 ---
Stephansson, O., Hudson, J., Jing, L. (Eds.), 2004. Coupled Thermo-Hydro-
Mechanical-Chemical Processes in Geo-Systems: Fundamentals, Modelling,
Experiments, and Applications. Geo-Engineering Book Series, vol. 2. Elsevier,
London, UK, 852pp.
Tezduyar, T.E., Sameh, A., 2006. Parallel ﬁnite element computations in ﬂuid
mechanics. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 195
(13–16), 1872–1884.
Thomas, H.R., Yang, H.T., He, Y., Cleall, P.J., 2003. A multi-level parallelized
substructuring-frontal solution for coupled thermo/hydro/mechanical pro-
blems in unsaturated soil. International Journal for Numerical and Analytical
Methods in Geomechanics 27, 951–965.
Topping, B.H.V., Khan, A.I., 1996. Parallel Finite Element Computations. Saxe-
Coburg Publications, Edinburgh, UK, 320pp.
Tsang, C.F., 1991. Coupled hydromechanical-thermomechanical processes in rock
fractures. Review of Geophysics 29 (4), 537–551.
Wallner, M., Lux, K.-H., Minkley, W., Hardy, H.R. (Eds.), 2007. The mechanical
behaviour of salt—understanding of THMC processes in salt. In: Proceedings of
the 6th Conference on the Mechanical Behavior of Salt, ‘SALTMECH6’. Taylor &
Francis Group, London, UK, 453pp.
Walshaw, C., Cross, M., Everett, M.G., 1997. Parallel dynamic graph partitioning for
adaptive unstructured meshes. Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing
47 (2), 102–108.
Wang, W., Kolditz, O., 2007 . Object-oriented ﬁnite element analysis of thermo-
hydro-mechanical (THM) problems in porous media. International Journal for
Numerical Methods in Engineering 69 (1), 162–201.
Wang, W., Walsh, R., Shao, H., Xie, M., Kolditz, O., 2007. Simulation of long
term thermal, hydraulic and mechanical interaction between buffer
and salt host rock. In: Proceedings of the 6th Conference on the Mechanical
Behavior of Salt ’SALTMECH6’ —The Mechanical Behavior of Salt —Understand-
ing of THMC Processes in Salt. Taylor & Francis Group, London, UK,
pp. 201–208.
Wang, X., Schreﬂer, B.A., 1998. A multi-frontal parallel algorithm for coupled
thermo-hydro-mechanical analysis of deforming porous media. International
Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering 43, 1069–1083.
Xie, M., Agus, S.S., Schanz, T., Kolditz, O., 2004. An upscaling method and numerical
modelling of swelling/shrinking processes in compacted bentonite/sand
mixtures. International Journal for Numerical and Analytical Methods in
Geomechanics 28, 1479–1502.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
W. Wang et al. / Computers & Geosciences 35 (2009) 1631–1641 1641