--- Page 1 ---
WP HERMES  
High fid Elity nume Rical siM ulations of strongly coupled processes 
for rE pository Systems  
 
QUESTIONNAIRE FOR POTENTIAL CONTRI BUTORS TO 
WP-HERMES  
 
We launch this questionnaire to further develop the work package description where your 
organ ization has expressed interest. This Questionnaire  will serve as the  input for the WP-HERMES 
Work Package “ High fidElity numeRical siMulations of strongly coupled processes for rEpository 
Syst ems ”. The information requested include  4 part:  
1) Partner Information 
2) Possible role of your institution in WP-HERMES  
3) Description of the available expertise and infrastructure 
4) Description of potential work in WP-HERMES 
 
The reference document for the WP-HERMES scope  & budget is the Template #2 approved by the core 
group and colleges  
The selection of the partners will be based in the information provided in the  questionnaire. P lease be 
accurate, clear and concise. The main criterial for the selection process are the s cientific excellence , 
relevance, cost/benefits positive attitude towards the collaborative spirit of joint EURAD program.  
Please download this questioner and budget table to   
https://drive.switch.ch/index.php/s/DYcO4GIj3nLkSJ3  (DropBox). Access code:  HERMES  
by the August  17th, 2023 ! 
Project description (Template #2) and the budget table is available at:  
https://drive.switch.ch/index.php/s/Hr6db5FUeAYhAfa  
Project specific question can be send to dedicated e -mail: WP18HERMES@gmx.ch ;

--- Page 2 ---
2 
PARTNER INFORMATION  
Partner 
Acronym  
Country  College  
 
Level of 
interest*  
H/M/L  
Willingness to join End -
user Group**  
BGR Germany  RE M  N 
 *L = Low: Supportive, will likely use the results from the WP (e.g. as an end- user)   
 M = Medium: Supportive, will likely contribute to the WP (e.g. contribute effort/time)  
H =   High: Supportive,  will likely play a central role in the WP (e.g. Task leader)  
** The duties of the End- user group are:  Evaluation of work program in terms of scope, excellence and 
implementation /safety case  relevance . SoTA : contribution and review. End -user group can include 
partners from RE/TSO/WMO. Work load ~ 1 PM. 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note: If 
your 
interest is 
only 
limited to 
be an end -
user group than you have finished with completing this questionnaire.  
 
  
 Name Institute  Email  
Person completing survey     
Contact Person (if different)  Gesa Ziefle  BGR 
(Geotechnical 
Safety Analysis)  
Gesa.Ziefle@bgr.de  
 
Other partner organisations 
involved in the experiment, if 
any.  
Olaf Kolditz  
Thomas 
Nagel  
Michal 
Béres 
Nicolas 
Tardieu  
UFZ 
TUBAF  
 
UGN 
 
EDF 
Olaf.kolditz@ufz.de  
thomas.nagel@ifgt.t
u-freiberg.de  
michal.beres @ugn.c
as.cz  
nicolas .tardieu @edf
.fr

--- Page 3 ---
3 
POSSIBLE INVOLVEMENT  IN WP 
Please select  task(s) you would like to participate in ( based on WP description in template #2 : 
Task 2 : Knowledge Management  
• SOTA report(s) & Knowledge gap analysis 
• Implementation and professional maintenance of 
collaborative platform for code development and 
machine learning.  
• Implementation of EURAD model -hub for linking data 
and models.  
• Maintenance of open access platform with experimental 
data for model testing  
☐ 
Expected budget:  
… [KEUR]  
Expected effort:  
… [PM]  
 
Task 3: Process couplings and computational performance  
• Definition and development of unified interfaces for 
process coupling  
• Development and coupling of tools for forward and 
inverse modelling as well as sensitivity analysis 
• Development of models with dynamic integration of 
data  
• Multiscale models couplings, parame ters transfer and 
upscaling 
☐ 
Expected budget:  
… [KEUR]  
Expected effort:  
… [PM]  
 
Task 4 : Surrogate modes of individual phenomena  
• Processes addressed: Chemistry / Gas -Mass-Heat 
transport / Mechanics 
• Application & implementation of machine learning 
methods and codes  
• Benchmarking of surrogate models against physical 
models and  experimental data 
☐ 
Expected budget:  
… [KEUR]  
Expected effort:  
… [PM]  
Task 5:  Tailored models for SA/PA and field scale mock -ups  
• Real time simulation of field scale experiments  
• Assessment of waste package integrity in extended 
storage 
• High fidelity models for repository near -field 
simulations 
• Dedicated models for optimisation and repository 
design  
• Integration of the models into DT concepts to be 
formalised in WP17 
☒ 
Expected budget:  
 38.7 [KEUR]  
Expected effort:  
1.88 [PM]

--- Page 4 ---
4 
EXPERTISE AND TOOLS AVAILABLE  
Experience in the field s 
relevant for WP -HERMES  
BGR has decades of experience in the implementation, 
development, and evaluation of numerical modeling  
methods for coupled THM processes, especially in the 
context of final disposal. This has been gained in 
international (DECOVALEX, Mont Terri, EBS Task Force, 
EURAD I, BEACON...) as well as national projects, and 
participation in safety investigations on t he Asse and 
Morsleben sites. Within the current DECOVALEX phase and 
EURAD Gas, BGR is involved in SA/PA tasks; in the national 
projects VSU, ANSICHT, CHRISTA, KOSINA and RESUS, BGR 
together with BGE -TECHNOLOGY and GRS was /is involved 
in the development and  exemplary application of a concept 
for the safety assessment of possible repository systems in 
clay, salt and crystalline rock in Germany , partly including 
UQ
. Model validation is performed, among others, by 
numerical simulation of near -field processes in  large -scale 
experiments, such as Mont Terri (CD -A, FE , Sandwich, FS ), 
ÄSPÖ, Bure, Horonobe.  
Link with other WP within 
EURAD -I 
Links exist with the current WP GAS (EURAD I) . 
Key relevant publications 
(max 5)  
Ziefle, G., Cajuhi, T., Graebling, N., Jaeggi , D., Kolditz, O., 
Kunz, H., Maßmann, J., Rink, K. (2022): Multi -disciplinary 
investigation of the hydraulic -mechanically driven 
convergence behavior: CD -A twin niches in the Mont Terri 
Rock Laboratory during the first year. Geomech. Energy 
Environ . 31 , art. 100325 Sci. 82 (1), art. 42  
Ziefle, G., Cajuhi, T., Costabel, S., Furche, M., and 
Maßmann, J. (2023): Water content evolution in the EDZ 
of Opalinus Clay: A methodic approach for a comparative 
interpretation of measurements and modelling. Rock 
Mechani cs and Rock Engineering, submitted  
Jobmann, M., Bebiolka, A., Burlaka, V., Herold, P., Jahn, S., 
Lommerzheim, A., Maßmann, J., Meleshyn, A., Mrugalla, S., 
Reinhold, K., Rübel, A., Stark, L. & Ziefle, G. (2017): Safety 
assessment methodology for a German high-level waste 
repository in clay formations. Journal of Rock Mechanics and 
Geotechnical Engineering, 9, 5: 856-876. 
DOI:10.1016/j.jrmge.2017.05.007 
Maßmann, J., Thiedau, J., Bittens, M., Kumar, V., Tran, T.V., 
Morel, C.G., Kneuker, T. & Schumacher, S. (2022): ANSICHT-II 
– Methode und Berechnungen zur Integritätsanalyse der 
geologischen Barriere für ein generisches Endlagersystem im 
Tongestein. Bundesanstalt für Geowissenschaften und 
Rohstoffe (BGR), Ergebnisbericht; Hannover. 
DOI:10.25928/n8ac-y452

--- Page 5 ---
5 
Available c omputational 
infrastructure   
4 conventional Linux -Server  with up to 100 cores  
2 KI-Server, each with 4 NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPU  
 
Availability or  / access to 
experimental data for code 
validation? (Describe)  
BGR is the principle investigator in the  Mont Terri CD -A-
Experiment . This long  term in -situ experiment focuses on 
the coupled hydraulic and mechanical behaviour of the 
Opalinus clay around two niches. BGR has  access to long -
term, ongoing measurements on deformation, humidity, 
water content, pore  water pressures, crack width, etc. 
There exist pointwise measurements (as piezometer, 
extensometer) and two -dimensional measurements, as 
ERT, TDR and laser scans. Especially for the water content 
evolution different results from different measurement 
devices are available.  Furthermore, geological 
characterization of inhomogeneities, as fractured zones, 
are available.  
Available / maintained 
modelling code  
(name/type /parallelisation/couplings/ …)  
BGR uses the OpenSource  FE code OpenGeoSys (OGS). 
In collaboration with the UFZ, BGR is also involved in the 
further development of the code. BGR is experienced in 
parallel computing of large systems with THM coupling, 
considering two -phase flow.  
 
PhD/Post Doc planned in 
the field of HERMES  
 
The participation of PhD/ PostDoc in the planned work is 
being sought.  
 
Modelling tools  
Modelling codes available 
(name)  
Type (FE,DEM, 
MM,FV,…)  
Scales covered  
(Field, 
Continuum, Pore 
molecular, …)  
Opensource  
code? (Y/N), 
code developed 
within EURAD? 
(Y/N) 
OpenGeoSys 6  FE Field to lab 
scale, based 
on mixing 
theory of 
porous media  
Y 
Y (partly)  
    
Process Couplings to be considered  
 Thermal  Mechanical  Chemical  Hydraulic  
Thermal  ☒    
Mechanical  ☒ ☒   
Chemical  ☐ ☐ ☐  
Hydraulic  ☒ ☒ ☐ ☒

--- Page 6 ---
6 
 
 
PROPOSED WORK 
(Max 100 words per T ask2; Max 300 words Tasks 3- 5 ) 
T2   
T3   
T4   
T5  The work package aims at simulating strongly coupled effects in the near -field of 
repository systems. Based on this, the interpretation of field experiments is envisaged. 
An application for data-driven modelling based on measurements will be the CD-A 
experiment at Mont Terri (Ziefle et al. 2022). Based on long term measurements and 
observations, machine learning (ML) methods could be used to analyse the EDZ and the 
associated water content evolution, with the aim of a process analysis and associated 
parameterisation of the EDZ as a basis for classical process modelling. This type of 
measurement driven modelling is an important complement to ML (e.g. neural 
networks) as it allows heterogeneities to be taken into account and will thus also be an 
important basis for classical process modelling. The planned Model -Hub (see UFZ Task 
2) for the combined use of different codes and related data sets would be a valuable 
tool and important basis for such modelling approaches. Links exist with the other 
activities such as the Mont Terri project. 
The aims of this work could be summarized as follows: 
• Improved understanding of EDZ evolution (TH2M) 
• Workflow for measurement-driven modelling 
• Validation on field scale (CD-A experiment) 
Explain how proposed work is different /similar  from current activities in EURAD -I (200 words max )  
The planned work is based on the exper ience gained from EURAD -I in the context of 
numerical modelling for the  safety assessement of potential repository systems in 
claystone  with OGS. However, EURAD  II will focus  on two aspects : a) The development 
of strategies for the effective modeling of  heterogeneous  near -field processes in the clay 
rock under inclusion of measurement data at the  large -scale in -situ experiment  CD-A. A 
modelling concept considering measurement driven approaches (e.g. ML) will be 
conceptualized  in collaboration with the team from UGN  (CZ), in particular to take into 
account the influence of in homogeneities as encountered in the EDZ.  b) The validation 
of numerical modelling  approaches on the b asis of in -situ measurements is being further 
advanced in c ollaboration with the team from EDF (FR) using the example of the CD-A 
experiment in M ont Terri.  
Indicates risks accompanying implementation of proposed work  
The risks are considered to be very low, as a lot of experience already exists. One risk is 
that not all targets can be achieved in the planned time. This could be caused by capacity 
constraints, especially in t erms of personnel.   
The proposed development of strategies for near field effects is based on the existence 
of a related data set. This data set  already exists for a time period of about 5  years.

--- Page 7 ---
7 
Consequently,  the risk of a lack of data is very low.   The proposed concept is  based on 
promising approaches, but parts of it are new and it will only become clear in the course 
of the work how effectively it can be applied to problems in practice.  
Define 3 possible KPI and crit eria of project success for evaluation after 48  month  
- Results from a 3D THM model of the CD -A-experiment are compared with 
measurements  
- A concept for measurement-driven process-modelling is defined 
- This concept was applied as an example to selected measurements 
 
 
Possible links with other EURAD -II projects qualified for template#3  
Links exist with the planned WP17 Digital Twin  (DITOCO) and WP12 Bentonite  
(ANCHORS) .