--- Page 1 ---
Minutes TD517_CD-A  
 
 
 
 
 
Technical discussion TD517_CD-A 
CDA Experiment 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Place:  Hybrid Meeting (St. Ursanne, Webex)  
Date: April 28 2026, 09:00 – 11:15

--- Page 2 ---
Participants Distribution 
 Participants 
and 
 
D. Jaeggi (swisstopo) 
K. Rink (UFZ) 
O. Kolditz (UFZ) 
J. Maßmann (BGR) 
T. Burschil (BGR) 
O. Czaikowski (GRS) 
J.L. Garcia-Sineriz (Amphos) 
J. Gerowski (BGR) 
T. Kneuker (BGR) 
S. Schefer (swisstopo) 
S. Condamin (swisstopo) 
M. Wengler (BGE) 
S. Tunon Valladares (Amphos) 
C. Ostertag-Henning (BGR) 
J. Hesser (BGR) 
M. Middelhoff (GRS) 
A. Liebscher (BGE) 
 
 
BGR:  G. Ziefle 
S. Chen (online) 
H. Kunz (online) 
T. Cajuhi (online) 
S. Costabel (online) 
M. Furche 
T. Beilecke 
V. Kumar 
GRS: K. Jantschik 
ISU:  F. Königer 
R. Schuhmann (online)  
swisstopo:  - 
ENSI:  B. Graupner 
UFZ:                    - 
BGE:  L. Peti 
Amphos:  - 
IGN:  M. Beres (online)

--- Page 3 ---
2 
Agenda  
 
Update of measurements (Geoscope and laser scans) has 
been sent (20.04.26) 
 
9:00 – 10:30: 
Update of measurements 
1. ERT (Markus) 
2. NMR (Stephan) 
3. Taupe (Franz) 
4. Levelling (Sebastian, Senecio, today: Gesa) 
5. Suction (Susana, Jose Luis, today: Gesa) 
6. Hannover Meeting focusing on measuring techniques 
(Taupe, NMR, ERT) 18.09.25 
 
10:30 – 11:30: 
Modelling activities 
1. Collaborations in the EURAD Hermes Workpackage 
(Gesa) 
2. Modelling at BGR (Shuang) 
 
Next steps:  
3. Measured trends? Any adjustments needed? 
4. Drilling program? 
5. Next meeting 
 
The slides of all presentations of this meeting (Gesa, Markus, 
Stephan, Franz, Sebastian, Shuang) as well as the current report 
on suction measurements (Susana) are send by mail (11.05.26).

--- Page 4 ---
3 
1. Update of measurements  
 
• An update of all measurements that are handled via 
Geoscope (relative humidity, temperature, opening times 
of door, extensometer, Mini-Piezometer, crackmeter, 
suction measurements) plus Laser scans with statistical 
interpretation has been sent to all partners (Mail sent by 
Gesa at 20.04.2026) 
 
Some remarks to these measurements: 
• RH and T measurements indicate very cold temperatures 
and low RH during the winter 25/26 
• Data failure of horizontal and vertical extensometers 
(BCD-A9 and BCD-A10) in the closed niche since 
September 2025 – next steps? 
• Mini-Piezometers BCD-A28 to BCD-A31 are working well 
• Crackmeter indicate ongoing trend in closed niche (1 
measuring point) and seasonal variation in open niche 
 
1. ERT 
 
Presentation Markus: CD-A_Stand-ERT-2026-04.pdf 
 
Update of relation between contact resistances and RH 
measurements confirms the strong correlation between 
these values. 
Comparison of the yearly amplitude indicates a decrease 
of the amplitude which might be a result of climatic 
conditions or a general effect. 
Interpretation of ERT mapping with yearly intervals in 
terms of relative resistivity changes show no continuous 
trend of the last 6 years. Resistivity changes are 
distributed heterogeneous along the niche contour. 
Largest changes are observed at the top of the niche and 
at distinct structures like fractures. 
 
2. NMR 
 
Presentation Stephan: NMR2026.pdf 
 
Weekly measurements of WC in open niche are presented 
as relationship with RH. 
While the closed niche behaves as expected (no 
significant difference), the seasonal changes in the open 
niche seem to be decreasing. To be observed 
 
Further laboratory experiments to interprete the relaxation 
times of clay rocks have been performed: Drying and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gesa / All

--- Page 5 ---
4 
wetting circles in a climate chamber => NMR at each 
moisture step. 
Most important question: Do we see the interlayer water in 
the Opalinus clay and can we quantify the content using 
NMR relaxometry? 
OPA in natural solid formation: bimodal NMR response 
indicates the two types of water binding. 
Separating them using cut-off values seem possible, 
however, diffusion and data noise smears the 
water signal in the range of the cut-off => quantification 
still challenging! 
 
3. Taupe 
 
Presentation Franz: 2604_TD_CD-A_ISU.pdf 
 
(Differential) TDR using TAUPE Sensor Cables: 
Closed Twin: No significant changes in ARDP during more 
than 6 years. However, areas with locally increased ARDP 
can be found near horizontal as well as vertical borehole. 
Open Twin: Interpretation of the mean amplitude over the 
first 0.5m: Major variations on ARDP due to 
meteorological effects, stronger in horizontal direction.  
A significant reduction in the ARDP from the start of 2025 
appears (not at S7front). 
Interpretation of mean amplitude over varying depth has 
been perfomed. 
Summary:  
Closed Twin: Horizontal: EDZ narrow, Moderate ARDP in 
most parts, Medium ARDP around 40 110 cm depth, 
slightly increasing, Starting increased ARDP zone at rear 
end 
Vertical: EDZ quite pronounced, Medium ARDP, in most 
parts only slightly increasing, Higher ARDP around 150 
cm and at borehole end (significant) 
Open Twin: Horizontal: EDZ pronounced, Slight variations 
of ARDP between 80 and 300 cm, Significantly higher 
ARDP behind about 300 cm (Borehole end), Potentially: 
Wet spots ? Perturbation/fault 
Vertical: EDZ quite pronounced, Low/medium ARDP over 
complete borehole, Only slight variations of ARDP over 
time, Slightly increased ARDP zone at sensor connection -
-> artificial 
 
4. Levelling 
 
Presentation Sebastian/Senecio (Gesa): 
Folien_Niv_TD_CDA_2026.pdf 
 
Precision Levelling Twin Niches Summary:  
Detectable displacement: from 0.1 to 0.2 mm 
(depending on the point; Confidence level 95%)

--- Page 6 ---
5 
Largest deformations: 
• CDA-O1: -2.1 mm (settlement) 
• CDA-C4: +1.3 mm (heave / uplift) 
On all other points: 
• With the exception of CDA-O1, there is a tendency 
towards uplift at all points in the Twin Niches. 
• The height changes in the Open Twin are smaller 
(except at the aforementioned point O1). 
Outlook 
• Measurements over a longer time period 
• Direct comparison with laser scanning measurements 
 
5. Suction 
 
Report Susana/ Jose Luis:  
RO_2013.4_3974_CD-A3 Phase 30_A21_TN-2025-
12_signed.pdf 
 
Report summarizes the performance of the suction 
measuring system, the supervisions, the interventions and 
gives recommendations for further proceeding 
Conclusions: 
The problems related to the functioning of the PSS 
datalogger persist. The psychrometers software is 
frequently found stopped and no data being collected. 
Sometimes this influences the SCADA due to the 
blockage of the communication port with the RH unit. In 
general, the problem can be solved by re-starting the PSS 
software but sometimes the reset of the PSS datalogger is 
also needed. 
The data acquisition of the thermo-hygrometers is running 
smoothly, and the trends are easy to understand. 
However, data from those installed in the closed twin 
seem to be affected by the high saturation of the rock 
driving to an increasing trend above the upper range, 
which is not realistic and probably related with drift and 
lack of accuracy at such range. 
The datalogger of the psychrometers is running with some 
difficulties but the data provided is usable. In the open 
niche the ranges are in general below the minimum for 
them. 
As conclusion, the thermo-hygrometers are the best for 
the supervision of the open niche while the psychrometers 
seems to be better for the closed one. 
Recommendations: 
Concerning the thermo-hygrometers system, it is 
recommended to isolate the connection port from the PSS 
ones. Initially this could be done with a serial to Ethernet 
converter. However, as there are two sensors (RH5 & 
RH7) above from 100% RH, it could happen they finally 
fail, and this could lead to communication difficulties in the 
common serial line. This phenomenon was already

--- Page 7 ---
6 
detected in Sandwich experiment. Thus, the proposal is 
installing a serial swich instead, which will isolate the serial 
lines of the 8 sensors and will connect to the computer by 
Ethernet. 
Several issues have been identified with the computer, 
including unexpected restarts and a faulty USB port used 
for connecting the psychrometer data logger. It is 
recommended to replace the computer with a new unit 
running a professional-grade operating system, ensuring 
compatibility with the legacy controllers required for the 
psychrometer logger. 
 
Amphos is going to provide a proposal for the next steps 
 
6. Hannover meeting on measuring techniques 
In September 2025 there has been a meeting related to 
measurements focusing on water content and related 
values (ERT, NMR, Taupe). It is planned to provide an 
interpretation of these measurements by means of the 
water content. The established and updated relationship 
between resistivity (ERT) and water content (NMR) will be 
used. An updated version of this relationship is planned for 
June 2026. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Susana/José 
Luis 
 
 
 
 
Markus/Steph
an 
2. Modelling  
 
• BGR Modelling Collaborations (Gesa) 
 
There are two collaborations within the EURAD Hermes 
Workpackage: 
 
1.) Collaboration with IGN (Czech Republic) 
Optimizing numerical models using geophysical data 
sets 
The colleague Tomas Luber (IGN) will be at the BGR 
from 22.6. to 26.6.26  
2.) Collaboration with EDF (France) 
Validation of modeling results against measurements. 
3 step strategy (basic 2D, 2D, 3D) as presented by 
Shunag 
 
• BGR Modelling (Presentation by Shuang): 
 
2D Models 
-Model with precise surface geometry:  
solver behavior and efficiency tested 
-Model with perfect ring geometry:  
Simulated elastic strain showed discrepancies vs. 
measurements (extensometer). This is focus of ongoing 
modeling.

--- Page 8 ---
7 
 
Modelling Strategy  
Stepwise benchmarking: Simple 2D → Complex 3D in-situ 
model. Finally targets to compare with extensometer and 
pore pressure measurement data. 
 
Next steps 
BGR internal: test of constitutive models.  
Collaboration: Benchmark BGR vs. EDF modelling. 
 
3. Various   
• Discussion of measurements with focus on measured 
trends and the question about next steps and possible 
adjustments of the CD-A experiment: 
Open twin: ongoing trend can be observed by various 
types of measurements (extensometer, suction, 
Taupe…). No adjustments planned. 
Closed twin: 
Most of the measurements indicate static conditions 
(extensometer, pore pressure, suction, …). The 
crackmeter measurements at one position in the CT 
indicate ongoing closure of the crack. Possible 
adjustments have been discussed and can be further 
discussed.  
Current idea/proposal (to be discussed): 
2027: Re-Installation of extensometer or fiber optic 
measurements in the closed twin (failure of old 
measurements since September 2025) 
Early 2028: Drilling campaign with geophysical 
characterization (NMR, ERT, Seismic, Permeability…) 
End of 2028: Climatization of Open Twin (to be 
defined) 
 
 
 
 
 
GRS 
4. Next steps  
It is planned to have an online meeting at the 5th of November at 
10am. An invitation will follow. 
A hybrid TD is planned in combination with the Technical Meeting 
2027. 
Gesa 
 
Gesa 
 
Hannover, 11.05.2026 
Protocol: Gesa Ziefle, BGR