--- Page 1 ---
Geomechanics for Energy and the Environment 31 (2022) 100325
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Geomechanics for Energy and the Environment
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/gete
Multi-disciplinary investigation of the hydraulic-mechanically driven
convergence behaviour: CD-A twin niches in the Mont Terri Rock
Laboratory during the first year
G. Ziefle a,∗, T. Cajuhi a, N. Graebling b, D. Jaeggi d, O. Kolditz b,c, H. Kunz a, J. Maßmann a,
K. Rink b
a Federal Institute for Geosciences and Natural Resources (BGR), Hanover, Germany
b Department of Environmental Informatics, Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research – UFZ, Leipzig, Germany
c Technische Universität Dresden (TUD), Germany
d Swiss Geological Survey, Federal Office of Topography (swisstopo), Wabern, Switzerland
a r t i c l e i n f o
Article history:
Received 10 May 2021
Received in revised form 29 January 2022
Accepted 9 February 2022
Available online 18 February 2022
Editors-in-Chief:
Professor Lyesse Laloui and Professor Tomasz
Hueckel
Keywords:
Mont Terri CD-A experiment
Coupled hydraulic–mechanical effects
Geology
Convergence measurements
Numerical modelling (OpenGeoSys)
Visualisation
a b s t r a c t
To enable safe geological storage of high-level radioactive waste, a comprehensive understanding of
the overall system must include relevant physical processes, geological and geotechnical boundary
conditions. In the Mont Terri Rock Laboratory (Switzerland) the Cyclic Deformation (CD-A) experiment
has been established with the excavation of the two twin niches in the year 2019. To study the impact
of the different climatic conditions on the hydraulic and mechanical processes in the claystone, an
extensive investigation program has been carried out. As part of the CD-A experiment, we present
here a multidisciplinary interpretation including geological characterisation, geodetic and geotechnical
measurements, numerical modelling and visualisation techniques. The period under consideration
runs between September 2019 and March 2021. Geological mappings illustrate different zones of
tectonically induced faulted rock in the sandy facies of the Opalinus Clay and laserscans conducted at
regular intervals show small convergence of the niches. While the deformation around the open niche
tends to continue, extensometer measurements around the closed twin indicate a reduced deformation
after the first months. First coupled hydraulic–mechanical simulations demonstrate that the numerical
approach is capable of reproducing the hydro-mechanical behaviour qualitatively, including the
extent of the desaturated zone. The application of state-of-the-art visualisation techniques allows
simultaneous evaluation and comparison of geological features, measurements and simulation results.
This holistic approach – discussed here exemplary for the mechanical effects – provides a valuable basis
for the rating of the impact of geologic structures, material heterogeneities, and climatic conditions
on the Opalinus Clay. Thus, it can be a valuable component for the safe construction and operation of
a repository and for the long term safety assessment.
© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
1. Introduction
The siting process for high-level radioactive waste repositories
(HLW) is a challenging task of international interest, which is
being dealt with at EU level in joint projects like EURAD e and
PREDIS.f The challenge to meet social and political requirements
concerning the safety of such repositories during a period of
up to one million years is a worldwide challenge. As a matter
of fact, there exist several approaches to investigate the related
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: Gesa.Ziefle@bgr.de (G. Ziefle).
e https://www.ejp-eurad.eu/ Last access date: 22-01-24.
f https://predis-h2020.eu/ Last access date: 22-01-24.
geological, physical, chemical and biological effects and obtain
an increased understanding of the relevant processes, the char-
acteristics of the host rock and the geotechnical barrier. The
common goal of all investigation concepts is a fundamental un-
derstanding of the whole system as this is of significant impor-
tance for the implementation of a secure repository for high-level
radioactive waste. Typical investigation methods are geological
investigations, laboratory investigations, in-situ measurements,
as well as numerical modelling approaches. Many of these inves-
tigations are hosted in Underground Research Laboratories like
Äspö1 in Sweden, Meuse/Haute-Marne 2 in France, Grimsel 3 and
Mont Terri 4 in Switzerland amongst others. They are operated
in close collaboration with related laboratory experiments. The
development of conceptual approaches and numerical models for
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gete.2022.100325
2352-3808/© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc-nd/4.0/).

--- Page 2 ---
G. Ziefle, T. Cajuhi, N. Graebling et al. Geomechanics for Energy and the Environment 31 (2022) 100325
Fig. 1. Location of the CD-A experiment in the Mont Terri rock laboratory.
safety assessments associated with these geophysical investiga-
tions is carried out in the context of international projects like
DECOVALEX,5 FORGE,6 BEACON7 and implemented in codes like
OpenGeoSys,8,9 CodeBright,10 Lagamine,11,12 3DEC13,14 amongst
others. Additional effort is undertaken in the area of data as well
as knowledge management, visualisation techniques and recently
also in fields like artificial intelligence or similar approaches. All
geological and geophysical findings have to be interpreted in a
combined manner to establish a groundwork for a holistic under-
standing of the system including information about uncertainties
and possible risks. The complex information is characterised by
various uncertainties and relevant boundary conditions that have
to be considered for the interpretation of the results. Conse-
quently, there exists a relevant need of knowledge management
in order to find the best possible solution for the management
of high-level radioactive waste. This is an important basis for a
political decision which is supported by the population.
This paper focuses on the interface between geologic-
geophysical investigations and numerical modelling approaches
with regard to the impact of host-rock heterogeneities on the
convergence behaviour around an excavation. Understanding the
short- and long-term convergence behaviour of excavations is a
challenging task with high relevance for the safety assessment of
a potential HLW repository. The topic has also been discussed in
Refs. 15–18. In the literature, various laboratory and in-situ obser-
vations concerning the geologic and geophysical characteristics
of Opalinus Clay at different scales and with different areas of in-
terest are reported and discussed. General geologic investigations
exist to characterise the Opalinus Clay like. 4,19–21 Other studies 22
focus on the hydraulic and mechanical properties of the exca-
vation damaged zone and on the hydraulic–mechanical effects
due to excavation 15,23 using in-situ investigations. Furthermore,
research is carried out to understand the coupled HM behaviour
of fault zones. 24,25 Additionally, laboratory experiments are per-
formed, interpreted and discussed in Ref. 26. Nevertheless, the
interpretation of the observed characteristics and the related nu-
merical modelling approaches are part of the current research 27
and pose many open questions, for example the implications of
fault zones for safety assessments. General statements are rarely
possible and the interpretation demands interdisciplinary collab-
oration. The work at hand presents a combined interpretation
of geologic characterisation as well as geodetic and geotechnical
measurements supported by visualisation techniques. It focuses
on a specific experiment carried out in the Opalinus Clay of
the Mont Terri rock laboratory in Switzerland and enables an
improved system understanding. The interdisciplinary approach
shown here proposes a methodic approach shifting from a pure
process level to a system level understanding. It provides infor-
mation about the possibilities of different investigation methods
and, with the help of visual methods, simplifies the interpretation
of the results obtained. Finally, it aims at informing about the
impact of various fault zones on the integrity and stability of
potential waste repositories.
The Mont Terri rock laboratory accommodates various field
experiments focusing on coupled thermal, hydraulic, mechanical,
chemical and biological effects in Opalinus Clay as summarised in
Ref. 4. The coupled hydraulic–mechanical (HM) effects are in the
focus of experiments like the Ventilation Experiment (VE), 28 the
RA experiment (Updated review of the Rock Mechanics Properties
of the Opalinus Clay of the Mont Terri URL based on Laboratory
and Field Testing 29) and also in the CD-A (Influence of humidity
on cyclic and longterm deformations) experiment. It aims for the
comprehension of these effects in claystone as they are of signif-
icant importance for the evaluation of the stability and integrity
of a potential deep geological HLW repository. It is important to
notice that the mentioned effects are long term effects. The ex-
pected convergence of the niches as well as possible desaturation
effects take place over dozens of years whereas the investigations
presented in this contribution were carried out in the first one to
two years after excavation. Consequently, the presented results
focus on the understanding of the system with its heterogeneities
and potential areas of particular interest. The interpretation of
measurements as well as the comparison of measurements and
modelling results focuses on general observations concerning
the system understanding and on a qualitative comparison of
measurements with numerical modelling results at this stage. The
planned quantitative numerical investigation of the convergence
behaviour will be based on the presented findings concerning the
impact of fault zones and on calibrated and further developed
numerical models.
The CD-A experiment evaluates strongly coupled hydraulic–
mechanical processes, aiming at the identification of the signifi-
cant effects in the vicinity of an excavation. It is characterised by
two parallel niches of 2.3 m diameter and 11 m length, which are
both oriented perpendicular to the strike of bedding and intersect
the same stratigraphical level. The CD-A experiment has been
implemented in 2019 and is located in the so-called Gallery 18.
Fig. 1 pictures the Mont Terri Rock Laboratory in combination
with the finite element mesh for the numerical CD-A model. The
rock near Gallery 18 is characterised by the sandy facies of the
Opalinus Clay. In the remainder of this paper, the colour code
generally used in the context of the CD-A experiment is used,
i.e. results of the open twin are plotted in blue, while results
of the closed twin are plotted in red, indicated by the red door
sealing the closed niche (presented in Fig. 2). The position along
the niche axes is given below in niche meters (NM), with niche
meter zero at the niche entrance of each niche. The host rock is
characterised by different zones of fractured rock. The excavation
and the climatic conditions in the niches lead to a desaturation
of the surrounding Opalinus Clay and convergence of the niches.
The surface of the claystone in the niches is not covered by any
kind of stabilising support as it can be seen in Fig. 2, which
2

--- Page 3 ---
G. Ziefle, T. Cajuhi, N. Graebling et al. Geomechanics for Energy and the Environment 31 (2022) 100325
Fig. 2. View into the twin niches. The niches have a diameter of 2.3 m. The surface of the claystone is neither stabilised nor covered.
Fig. 3. Relative air humidity monitoring the seasonal effects in the open twin and the high relative humidity in the closed twin within the first years.
provides a view of both niches. Consequently, a direct exchange of
the humidity and temperature in the niches and the claystone is
possible, which includes desiccation effects leading to shrinkage
and possible fracturing. While the closed niche features an air
lock at the entrance to ensure that the relative air humidity
remains as high as possible to avoid desaturation effects, the
climatic conditions in the open niche vary due to seasonal effects
as in the rest of the Mont Terri rock laboratory Fig. 3. With that,
the CD-A experiment focuses on a comparison of the processes
of the two parallel niches: the open niche is characterised by
effects due to seasonal desaturation, whereas desaturation effects
are minimised in the closed niche by maintaining a constant high
humidity.
After the excavation of the niches, laser scans of both niches
have been carried out and give precise information about the con-
vergence behaviour. Furthermore, various measurements focus-
ing on the deformation behaviour as well as hydraulic aspects are
carried out and introduced in Ref. 30. Fig. 4 provides an overview
of boreholes around the twin niches, hosting various devices
monitoring the temperature, the water content (Taupe/TDR mea-
surements), the permeability (Evapometer measurements), the
pore pressure (Minipiezometer measurements) and the tempera-
ture and strains (Extensometer measurements). Additional mea-
surements focusing on the climatic conditions, the evolution of
the water content, the electric resistivity and the evolution of
microcracks are carried out within the niches. This paper concen-
trates on the deformation measurements within and around the
niches, while the results of related measurements are discussed
in Refs. 31, 32. Further publications concerning these topics are
in preparation.
Besides the measurements, the current study focuses on the
visualisation and interpretation of the measured convergence
during the first years after excavation. Potential impacts of the
heterogeneities characterising the claystone as well as preexisting
fractured areas and climatic conditions within the niches are
taken into account.
2. Methods of investigation
The combination of different investigation methods is a
promising procedure for an increased understanding of the com-
plex coupled hydraulic–mechanical effects in the heterogeneous
claystone. The investigation program comprises the geologic
characterisation, geophysical measurements, numerical modelling
and visualisation techniques and a combined interpretation of the
results is presented in the following Section 3.
2.1. Geology of the open and closed twin niches
This section provides information about the geology of the
niches as it is presented in Ref. 33 in detail. More information
about the lithography of the Opalinus Clay in the area of the
Mont Terri rock laboratory can be found in Refs. 4, 20, 21. The
tectonic structure of the main fault is discussed in Ref. 34 and the
3

--- Page 4 ---
G. Ziefle, T. Cajuhi, N. Graebling et al. Geomechanics for Energy and the Environment 31 (2022) 100325
Fig. 4. Section of Gallery 18 (blue) with the closed (red) and open (blue) twin niche. The gallery is shown opaque while its excavation disturbed zone is slightly
transparent. Also visible are boreholes containing measurement equipment. The precise location where the extensometer sensors are installed is shown in yellow.
Fig. 5. Closed twin NM8.8, sideritic lenses (brown), biodetritic rich lenses (blue)
and pyrite nodule (yellow) illustrating the heterogeneity of the upper sandy
facies.
geomechanical behaviour across multiple scales is summarised in
Ref. 17.
2.1.1. Methodology
The geological mapping of the open and closed twin niches
was performed in September 2019. The two 11 m long niches
with 2.3 m circular shape were excavated with daily progress
ranging between 1 and 2 m with a pneumatic hammer. The pho-
togrammetric system ShapeMetrix3D ™ was applied in order to
document the geological structures on a fully digital basis. At the
outcrop, a digital mapping on a tablet computer was combined
with the photogrammetric acquisition. Once the 3D model of the
daily advance was created in the office, the geological model
could be refined and imported into the geo-modelling tool move ™
for further geometric analysis and the creation of the geological
map view.
2.1.2. Results regarding lithology
The two niches are located in the upper sandy facies entirely.
Bedding here is dipping 55–60 ◦ towards 145◦. The axis of the two
niches is oriented perpendicular to strike of bedding. The upper
sandy facies is characterised by silty clay with abundant thin
elongated sand lenses, mm-thick sand layers, calcareous micritic,
bioturbated and sideritic nodules and biodetritic layers (Fig. 5).
Up to several tens of cm long calcareous micritic concretions
with typical inherent calcite veins and cm-long pyrite nodules
are common. The abrupt changes of rather soft laminated clay
to well cemented and extremely hard micritic concretions lead
to high sedimentary heterogeneity and changing rock stiffness.
For both niches, especially in the first 3 m, micritic layers of up
to 30 cm thickness and large concretions are abundant. Sideritic
lenses and pyrite nodules occur all over the place. A significant
pyrite horizon composed of discontinuous individual nodules of
1–3 cm thickness is present in both niches at niche meter 3.0 m.
Fig. 6. Flat SSW-dipping fault displacing a biodetritic bed within the first niche
meter of the closed twin. The lower photo displays the second crossing of the
bed (to the left of the upper photo).
2.1.3. Results on tectonic structure
The faults in the closed twin niche form 3 clusters. Bedding
parallel faults (144/57), flatly SW-dipping faults (195/30) and N-
S-striking faults. At niche meter (NM) 2.0, a flat SW-dipping fault
displacing a biomicritic carbonate bed by about 20 cm is present
(Fig. 6 top). The fault cuts the same bed on the left tunnel wall
displacing the bed of about 15 cm. At this location, the fault
splits into two branches (Fig. 6 bottom). Another conspicuous
fault is a vertical N-S striking fault (097/85) with thin calcite
crystallisation. The fault crosscuts the niche obliquely from NM6
to NM8.7. The N-S striking fault was formed relatively early in
the tectonic history as it was displaced by bedding parallel fault
planes at several locations with displacements ranging between
5 to 15 cm (Fig. 7).
Although the two twin niches are parallel and only 10 m apart,
the observed characteristics of the faults in this region strongly
4

--- Page 5 ---
G. Ziefle, T. Cajuhi, N. Graebling et al. Geomechanics for Energy and the Environment 31 (2022) 100325
Fig. 7. N-S-striking fault in the closed twin, here in the ceiling. Displacement
(A) and rotation (B) of the fault when crossing bedding parallel faults.
Fig. 8. Open twin, NM 5.5. Bedding-parallel fault zone (dark red) cutting a flat
SW-dipping fault (orange) (view towards East).
Fig. 9. Open twin, system of flatly dipping (238/07) faults (red) showing drag
folds (orange) and cm displacement of bedding planes (green). Faults are filled
with calcite precipitations and visible as veins.
differ as shown in Fig. 10. In the open twin, mainly flat to very
flat faults dipping SW and NW are observed. Scaly clay occurred
at a flat NW-dipping fault (296/25) intersected by the SW-dipping
one at NM 5.5. One major bedding parallel structure is observed.
It is a 5 to 15 cm-thick fault zone (145/59) with scaly clay and
well visible shear bands at NM 4.5. This bedding parallel fault
zone is cutting a flat SW-dipping fault (222/07). On the other
side of the fault zone, the flat SW-dipping fault is not visible
anymore (Fig. 8), pointing to an enhanced displacement. This
fault is part of series of calcite-filled faults occurring from NM 5.5
until NM 11. They are organised in a system with several levels
of flat SW-NW-dipping (10–25 ◦) faults. All these veins are being
displaced or stopping at the bedding parallel fault zone. As part
of the faults, these veins are featuring a varying thickness across
short distances and often split into several branches. Calcite veins
can be traced over several metres and some of them show well
developed drag folds indicating a dextral shear direction (Fig. 9).
2.2. Geodetic and geotechnical measurements
In the context of the CD-A experiment, different kinds of
geodetic and geotechnical measurements are used. While this
paper focuses on the deformation measurements, the investiga-
tions concerning the water content and the pore pressures will be
discussed in accompanying publications (in preparation). Further
information concerning the installation and the set-up of the
measuring program can also be found in Refs. 30, 35. Concerning
the convergence of the niches, the laser scans provide detailed
information at each point of the surface of the niches, while the
extensometers measure deformations within the host rock and
the 3D-convergence measurements provide precise information
of the convergence of the niches with regard to defined an-
chor points and dates. The different kinds of measurements are
summarised in Table 1 and introduced in this section while a
discussion of the results can be found in Section 3.
2.2.1. Laser scans
Within the first year after the excavation of the niches, laser
scans with a resolution of 1 mm and an accuracy in the order of
2 to 3 mm have been carried out at seven different days during
the whole year and introduced in Ref. 36. The measurements
are related to fixed points in Gallery 18, known to be station-
ary and located in the niche area. Within and in front of each
niche, various targets have been positioned for the calibration
of the point clouds. About 6 scans per niche were performed
for pre-calibration on site to obtain the highest accuracy for
the measurements on the rock. The distance of the targets, the
resolution and the angle of impact of the laser on the measured
element were taken into account to guarantee the quality of
the measurements. First results indicate that both niches are
very stable with small deformations in a range of millimetres.
Fig. 11 (top) presents the results of the laser scans for the initial
measurements, carried out on September 13, 2019. Within the
context of the CD-A experiment, the temporal evolution of the
deformations at different locations is of particular interest. The
results indicate areas where the surface of the host rock moves
towards the central axis (convergence) of the niche or in the op-
posite direction (divergence) as it is presented in Fig. 11 (bottom).
A cylindrical coordinate system has been used for calculation and
evaluation of the changes.
Fig. 12 shows the deformation of the closed and open niches at
different dates after postprocessing. The visualised measurements
have been carried out in winter 2019 and summer 2020 during
the first year after excavation and are evaluated with regard
to the initial measurement in September 2019. Both niches are
very stable but are also characterised by an ongoing convergence
process with deformations in the range of tenth of millimetres
as indicated by the yellow areas. These measurements indicate
a convergence of the niches in the vertical direction, while the
horizontal deformations show no clear trend for this short time
period since excavation. In the open niche (blue frame), the
pictured deformations depend significantly on the distance to the
Gallery 18. A possible reason might be the geological characteris-
tic of the host rock in this area. Judging the influence of seasonal
changes of the climatic conditions is currently not possible. This
is due to the fact that the available measurements correspond to
a single year after excavation. Further observation of these effects
within the next years will provide important information to an-
swer some of these questions and will be part of the long-term
investigation program within the CD-A experiment.
5

--- Page 6 ---
G. Ziefle, T. Cajuhi, N. Graebling et al. Geomechanics for Energy and the Environment 31 (2022) 100325
Fig. 10. Faults observed in the area of the twin niches as 3-dimensional plot (top) and 2-dimensional presentation as given in Ref. 33 (bottom).
Table 1
Convergence measurement methods within the CD-A experiment and respective
measured entities.
Method Position Interval Measured entity Unit
Laser scans Surface Varying [months] Position –
Convergence Depths 5 cm Varying Displacement mm
measurements and 20 cm [months]
Chain extensometer Boreholes Continuous Displacement mm
2.2.2. 3D-convergence measurements
Convergence measurements are carried out within both niches
and are described in detail in Ref. 30. The prisms for the conver-
gence measurements are located at three different profiles within
each niche. They are fixed in a depth of 5 cm at niche meter
5.5 m and at a depth of 20 cm at 5.0 m and 6.0 m, respectively.
This kind of measurements focuses on the long term evolution of
the niches and provides periodic information regarding the dis-
placement of the prisms. Measurements during the first months
after excavation are depicted in Fig. 13 for the vertical direction
and in Fig. 14 for the translatoric direction. The results for the
positions in the upper part of the niches are presented at the
top, the lower positions at the bottom. The vertical displacements
indicate an uplift of the ground and a subsidence of the roof
which is consistent with the expected convergence of the niches.
This trend can be seen at all measured positions of the closed
twin. Differing results are measured only for upper region of
the SW-oriented (‘‘left’’) part of the open twin which exhibits
different results compared to the NE-oriented part of this niche.
Fig. 14 shows the translatoric displacements within the niches.
While all positions indicate displacements up to a maximum of
2.5 mm, there is one outlier in position 60. This point shows
higher values up to 3.0 mm. Nevertheless, all measurements
indicate a trend of the displacements towards the NE-direction.
Furthermore, the measurements in the open twin indicate a slight
influence of the seasonal variations of the climatic conditions of
the niches. This is a preliminary assumption based on very few
measurements carried out until now.
As expected, the measurements indicate a convergence of the
niches. This trend is even clearer for the vertical direction than for
6

--- Page 7 ---
G. Ziefle, T. Cajuhi, N. Graebling et al. Geomechanics for Energy and the Environment 31 (2022) 100325
Fig. 11. The initial measurements of the open niche (top left/blue frame) and the closed niche (top right/red frame) are shown. The evaluation of the convergence
due to laser scan data at different dates are depicted on the bottom: the deformation of the niche leading to a reduction of its profile is shown in yellow, while a
profile extension is shown in red.
Fig. 12. Convergence of the niches resulting from laser scan data at different times. Yellow areas: Convergence of the niche. Red areas: Extension of the niche.
7

--- Page 8 ---
G. Ziefle, T. Cajuhi, N. Graebling et al. Geomechanics for Energy and the Environment 31 (2022) 100325
Fig. 13. Measured vertical displacements [mm] of the anchor points during the first months after excavation. The blue lines indicate results of the open twin and
the red lines of the closed twin. The dashed lines represent the anchors at the SW-oriented (‘‘left side’’) positions while the solid lines represent the anchors at the
NE-oriented (‘‘right side’’) positions within the niches.
the horizontal direction, which can also be seen in Fig. 15. Here,
the displacements measured in February 2021 are visualised with
regard to the initial state measured by the laser scan. While the
colour code represents the amplitude of the displacement, the
radius of the coloured dots provides information about the depth
of the anchor (big sphere: anchor depth of 5 cm and small sphere:
anchor depth of 20 cm). Outliers are located in the NE-part of the
open twin and the SW-part of the closed twin, which could be
caused by the geologic heterogeneities in these zones.
2.2.3. Extensometer measurements
Extensometer measurements are used to get information
about the deformation behaviour around the niches. The ex-
tensometer measurements are located in boreholes around the
niches as depicted in Fig. 4 and as it is carried out similarly in
Ref. 15. Each niche accommodates a vertical and a horizontal
borehole with a length of 4 m each. Two additional boreholes
have been drilled from the gallery and end up at about 1 m below
the niches respectively. They have a length of approximately
12.5 m each. Within the boreholes, chain extensometers have
been installed. They consist of anchor-elements connected to
each other by glass fibre rods and measure the unidirectional
displacements of the anchor points relative to each other. The
measuring range of the displacement sensors is 100 mm and
provides an accuracy of 0.0015% of full scale (FS). The sensor is
also equipped with a temperature measurement device and pro-
vides information about the length of each segment continuously.
Further information is summarised in Ref. 37.
As the chain extensometers provide measurements of the
change of the length of a segment between two anchor points,
there is no fixed point which could be used as a static refer-
ence. Consequently, the evaluation of the displacements contains
uncertainties as every point might be subjected to possible move-
ments. As a consequence, the interpretation of the measured
values in the following section is carried out with two different
approaches, namely the segmental interpretation and the fixpoint
interpretation. The segmental interpretation gives information
about the strains of each single segment and indicates directly
the segments which are characterised by compression or ex-
tension. In contrast to that, the fixpoint interpretation of the
measurements is characterised by the assumption that the point
with the largest distance to the niche is fixed. This gives the
opportunity to indicate the displacements of each anchor point
relative to the fixpoint. One has to keep in mind that especially for
the boreholes, which are drilled from the gallery, this approach
neglects displacements near the gallery.
The temporal evolution of the segmental strains is presented
in Fig. 16 (top) for both niches while Fig. 16 (bottom) shows the
8

--- Page 9 ---
G. Ziefle, T. Cajuhi, N. Graebling et al. Geomechanics for Energy and the Environment 31 (2022) 100325
Fig. 14. Measured translatoric displacements [mm] of the anchor points during the first months after excavation. The blue lines indicate results of the open twin
and the red lines of the closed twin. The dashed lines represent the anchors at the SW-oriented (‘‘left side’’) positions while the solid lines represent the anchors
at the NE-oriented (‘‘right side’’) positions within the niches.
Fig. 15. Visualisation of the last date of measurement (February 2021) for the open twin (left) and the closed twin (right) at a depth of 5 cm (big sphere) and of
20 cm (small sphere) in combination with the laser scan data.
situation for the last measuring date in a 3-dimensional view.
Here, the colour code of the segments represents the strains of
each segment. The fixpoint interpretation is pictured in Fig. 17.
The colour code of the measuring points indicates displacements
with regard to the fixpoint. Positive values suggest an increase
of the distance to the fixpoint while negative values indicate a
movement of this point towards the fixpoint. Generally, the order
of magnitude of the measured deformations is in the range of
tenths of a millimetre. This order of magnitude of deformations
seems to be in line with other tests, such as mine-by tests in
different kinds of shales, 15,23 which yield deformations in the
range of a few millimetres up to some centimetres. The measure-
ments in the vertical boreholes indicate an uplift of the ground
in both niches as expected, but the deformations around the
open niche are generally larger. Finally, the interpretation of the
measurements yields the following assumptions:
• Movements around the open niche (BCD-A2 and BCD-A6)
are significantly higher than at comparable locations at the
closed niche. This can be seen clearly in both interpretations
(Figs. 16 and 17). The measurements along the borehole
BCD-A2 are characterised by heterogeneities which lead
to differing results for the different measuring points and
segments. This effect might be due to heterogeneities and
fractures in this area.
9

--- Page 10 ---
G. Ziefle, T. Cajuhi, N. Graebling et al. Geomechanics for Energy and the Environment 31 (2022) 100325
Fig. 16. Evaluation of the extensometer measurements as segmental strains [mm/mm] near the closed twin (left/red) and the open twin (right/blue). Top:
measurements of BCD-A1 (closed niche) and BCD-A2 (open niche) (drilled from the gallery); Centre upper part: measurements along the vertical boreholes; Centre
lower part: measurements along the horizontal boreholes. Bottom: Visualisation of the segmental displacements along the boreholes drilled from the gallery for the
last measuring date.
• The vertical deformations are characterised by positive
strains (extension) – they indicate an uplift of the ground
of the niches. Remarkable in this context are the results of
the segments near the twins (darkest lines). As expected,
these points show the highest values. Furthermore, they
show significantly different behaviour, which might be due
to the different climatic conditions within the niches and
will be part of further investigations.
• Horizontal displacements are significantly smaller than ver-
tical displacements.
• While the deformation around the open niche tends to
continue, the measurements in the closed niche seem to be
10

--- Page 11 ---
G. Ziefle, T. Cajuhi, N. Graebling et al. Geomechanics for Energy and the Environment 31 (2022) 100325
Fig. 17. Extensometer measurements near the open twin (left/blue) and the closed twin (right/red): Evaluation of measured displacements related to a fixpoint. This
fixpoint is assumed to be at point 0, which is located at the deepest point of the borehole. Top: Measurements of BCD-A2 (open niche) and BCD-A1 (closed niche)
(drilled from the gallery); Central upper part: Measurements along the vertical boreholes; Central lower part: Measurements along the horizontal boreholes. Bottom:
Visualisation of the extensometer measurements along the boreholes drilled from the gallery 1.5 years after installation.
11

--- Page 12 ---
G. Ziefle, T. Cajuhi, N. Graebling et al. Geomechanics for Energy and the Environment 31 (2022) 100325
Fig. 18. CD-A numerical model setup. The closed niche is represented in red, while the parallel oriented open twin niche is coloured in blue. The niches are accessed
through the gallery (blue). In the closed niche, a constant pressure is applied. Both the open niche and the gallery are subjected to a cyclic pore pressure. The
pressures assigned to the boundary conditions (outer boundary layer of each niche) are based on the measured relative air humidity.
characterised by reduced deformation after the first years.
This might be a result of the climatic conditions within
the closed niche and should be part of further long-term
investigations.
2.3. Numerical modelling
At this early state of the CD-A experiment, the model set-up
aims for a basic understanding of the prevailing processes. Het-
erogeneities as they are discussed in this paper as well as more
complex constitutive relationships like plastic or viscous be-
haviour, saturation dependent parameters, and swelling/shrinkage
of the host rock are not captured in the model so far. To reproduce
the cyclic deformation related to the coupled process induced
by seasonal humidity changes, a three-dimensional model of the
Opalinus Clay with the Gallery 18 and both twin niches has been
set up using the Finite Element software OpenGeoSys (OGS). 38,39
This modelling software is open-source, which is of great ad-
vantage in the research of numerical methods. In the geosci-
entific community, OGS is used to simulate thermal–hydraulic–
mechanical and chemical processes in porous media. In this
work, a macroscopic hydro-mechanical model consisting of the
momentum balance equation of the solid and the mass balance
equation of the pore fluid 18,39,40 is used. The coupling between the
hydraulic and mechanical processes is realised by the Biot’s effec-
tive stress law and a linear Bishop’s approximation. 40–42 The main
variables of the model are the solid displacement vector (de-
formation) and the liquid pore pressure. The hydro-mechanical
coupled model takes into account variable saturation according
to the Richards assumption 43: The air pressure is considered
constant and the liquid pore pressure drives the development
of capillary pressure. The balance equations are complemented
with constitutive laws such as the van Genuchten curve 44 to
compute variable saturation. The gas entry pressure, shape pa-
rameter and residual saturation for fitting the van Genuchten
curve are displayed in Table 2. Fig. 18 shows different views of
the modelled domain, which has dimensions of approximately
50 × 30 × 20 m 3 and which is discretised by approximately
180 thousand tetrahedral elements for the computation with the
Finite Element Method. Note that the air lock between the gallery
and the closed niche are explicitly modelled, whereas the exca-
vation damage zones are not. The material properties utilised in
the simulation correspond to the sandy facies of the Opalinus Clay
with anisotropic hydraulic and mechanical behaviours described
in the literature. 4 The material properties are summarised in
Table 2. An anisotropy ratio of 2.5 is chosen to compute intrinsic
permeability.45
Initially, an in-situ stress 18,46 is assigned to the mesh and the
liquid pore pressure is set to 0 MPa on the entire domain. The
measurements of in-situ stress and in-situ pore pressure are chal-
lenging and change due to activities such as excavation and open
Table 2
Parameters and material properties for modelling the CD-A experiment.
Parameter Value
In-situ stress −(5, 5, 7) × 106 Pa
In-situ pore pressure 0 .0 × 106 Pa
Grain density 2520 kg m −3
Porosity 0.105
Liquid density 1000 kg m −3
Dynamic viscosity 1 .0 × 10−3 Pa s −1
Bulk modulus 1 .0 × 109 Pa
Intrinsic permeability 1 .0 × 10−19 m2
Anisotropy ratio 2.5
Gas entry 10 .0 × 106 Pa
Shape parameter 0.45
Residual saturation 0.10
Elastic modulus (perpendicular) 6 .0 × 109 Pa
Elastic modulus (parallel) 13 .8 × 109 Pa
Poisson’s ratio (perpendicular) 0.22
Poisson’s ratio (parallel) 0.44
Shear modulus (perpendicular) 3 .2 × 109 Pa
Biot coefficient 1
conditions.46,47 Note that the in-situ pore pressure is smaller than
the measured pore pressure in Mont Terri 48 to avoid numerical
instabilities due to the boundaries (size) of the modelled domain.
Since the focus of the current paper is a qualitative comparison
between the model behaviour and measurements, the effect of
initial conditions, excavation and selected heterogeneities will be
considered in further investigations. Furthermore, the mechanical
boundary conditions are assigned to avoid rigid body motion nor-
mal to the outer boundaries and the liquid pore pressure around
the outer boundaries of the domain corresponds to the initial
condition. In the experimental setup, the relative air humidity is
monitored in the niches as depicted in Fig. 3. To reproduce the
experiment and obtain input data for the numerical simulation,
we calculate the pore pressure using the relative air humidity via
the Kelvin equation. To reproduce the seasonal changes of relative
humidity, a seasonal, sine shaped, time-dependent pore pressure
is applied in the open niche and gallery walls (blue segments in
Fig. 18). A constant pressure based on the average of the largest
monitored air humidity values is applied in the closed niche (light
red segments in Fig. 18).
The model is able to reproduce the expected coupled hydro-
mechanical behaviour qualitatively, where changes in saturation
lead to deformation (displacements). Desaturated zones are iden-
tified in the simulation after a few winter-summer cycles as
shown in Fig. 19. These results are in agreement with the ob-
servations, since desaturation is recorded during winter, while
a re-saturation is observed in the near field during the summer
period.18 The low permeability of the rock does not allow for
rapid changes in saturation and the material remains wetter,
12

--- Page 13 ---
G. Ziefle, T. Cajuhi, N. Graebling et al. Geomechanics for Energy and the Environment 31 (2022) 100325
Fig. 19. Desaturated zones around the niches and the gallery.
Fig. 20. Location of the experiment within the stratigraphy of Jurassic mountains. Left: Visualisation of the sandy and shaly layers within the Opalinus Clay (OC).
Right: mapping layer information onto the tunnel system.
the further away it is from the open niche/gallery. To avoid
repetitions, the results concerning the mechanical behaviour are
discussed and compared with the experiments in Section 3. Fur-
ther aspects regarding the modelled domain, influence of exca-
vation and extension of constitutive laws to allow the modelling
of shrinkage-induced cracking 32,49 will be considered in future
studies.
2.4. Visualisation
To facilitate an improved understanding of the complex pro-
cesses taking place inside the layer of Opalinus Clay surrounding
Gallery 18 and the twin niches, a 3D scene has been set up
using the OpenGeoSys Data Explorer. 50 and ParaView 51 Both pro-
grammes employ the VTK programming library 52 for creating,
modifying, and representing 3D objects and datasets. Structures
such as the tunnel system, geological layers and faults are repre-
sented via triangulated surfaces of varying resolution, depending
on the level of detail needed to adequately represent the data.
Boreholes shown in Fig. 4 are represented via tubes with a diam-
eter scaling corresponding to the size of the diameter of the drill
bit used, with locations of sensor positions (e.g. extensometers)
being enlarged for emphasis. The numerical model detailed in
Section 2.3 consists of over 180.000 tetrahedra, including more
than a dozen parameters assigned to either nodes or cells, includ-
ing material parameters required for the simulation as well as
values calculated during the process simulation. Colour look-up
tables and parameters such as transparency, scaling, or light-
ing can be adjusted for each dataset individually, based on the
requirements of the research. In addition, datasets can be post-
processed by applying algorithms either modifying the geomet-
rical structure of the data (e.g. clipping planes) or calculating
representations on the node- or cell-based parameters (e.g. con-
tour surfaces based on simulated saturation, as shown in Fig. 19).
CAD-data, measurements, and simulation results are integrated
within the same frame of reference, allowing for an interactive
exploration of the setup of the experiment (Fig. 4). With the scene
being fully interactive and the user being able to navigate freely
and to adjust parameters as needed, it also becomes possible
to thoroughly explore and assess the complex transient hydro-
mechanical simulation results calculated via OpenGeoSys and
compare them to observation data collected via sensors. In addi-
tion, the 3D scene gives a structural perspective of discontinuities
within the domain of the experiment and where the experiment
is located, both within the Mont Terri tunnel system (Fig. 1) and
within the sandy facies of the Opalinus Clay layer as part of the
complex stratigraphy of the Jurassic Mountains (Fig. 20).
3. Holistic interpretation and discussion of the results
The aim of the presented investigations is an increased pro-
cess understanding of the hydraulic-mechanically driven effects
around the niches and the understanding of the geological sys-
tem. The derived information of geological investigations has to
be interpreted regarding the impact of different heterogeneities
in order to decide whether the detected fault zones have to be
considered in the numerical modelling approach. The introduced
approaches give complementary information on various scales
of time and space. The expected coupled hydraulic–mechanical
processes are characterised by the excavation effects as well
as the initial desaturation of the claystone around the niches
and the gallery. The host rock is characterised by heterogeneous
claystone and a complex non-linear material behaviour. The cou-
pled hydraulic–mechanical effects are influenced and controlled
13

--- Page 14 ---
G. Ziefle, T. Cajuhi, N. Graebling et al. Geomechanics for Energy and the Environment 31 (2022) 100325
Fig. 21. Visualisation of the convergence of the niches via measurements and simulation. The convergence of the niches is clearly indicated in the convergence and
extensometer measurements as well as in the simulation.
on the one hand by the heterogeneous material composition,
mineralogical composition and geologic characteristics and on the
other hand by the boundary conditions like the stress field, the
water content, the temperature and the technical construction of
the excavated areas. The presented methods of investigation give
insights in the complex situation. Main outcomes are discussed
in this section.
The convergence of the niches in the vertical direction can
be clearly seen in the extensometer measurements and the laser
scan data at the bottom of the niches. Furthermore, the laser
scans and the convergence measurements confirm this trend at
the top of the niches. In the horizontal direction, such a trend is
not clear yet, which is consistent with results presented in Ref. 23
but might also be a matter of the short time period since the
excavation of the niches. According to the laser scans, the trend of
convergence is stronger in the closed niche than in the open twin.
The overall trend of convergence in the measurements is also re-
flected by the numerical modelling results, where contraction and
extension is calculated in the expected areas. The vertical strains
are larger (absolute value) than the horizontal ones. Furthermore,
the influence of the seasonal boundary condition is observed at
the entrance of the closed niche and along the open niche. Fig. 21
provides a comprehensive overview of the deformation behaviour
in the measured and simulated data.
The scale of the measured deformations is in a similar range
for all types of measurements and also for the numerical results.
In the latter, pre-calculations to evaluate the model parameters
and its sensitivity were performed. As expected, the calculated
deformations near the gallery are larger than in the surrounding
area. The measured range of deformations lies in the order of
tenth of millimetres near the niches. Nevertheless, it is important
to notice that all types of measurements indicate outliers or irreg-
ular results which may result from different uncertainty sources.
The treatment of these measured values has to be discussed on
the basis of the individual case. A summary of these cases is
presented in Table 3 and indicates that most of the deviating
results are measured in the area near the open twin. This might
be due to the geologic situation especially on the SW-side (‘‘left
side’’) of the open twin as it is presented in Fig. 22. Here, an
impression of the geologic situation around the niches in com-
bination with a visualisation of the measuring positions is given
(top) and fault zones of specific interest are highlighted (bottom).
Another reason for irregular measurements at the open twin,
especially in the near-field of the niche, might be the climatic
situation of the open twin which is characterised by seasonal
influences.
The interpretation of the laser scan data has to be carried out
carefully as the measurements are restricted to the first year after
excavation. Within this time period, the niches are very stable
and the observed deformations are in a very small range, which is
close to the accuracy of the measurement method. Nevertheless,
the provided results are physically comprehensible as presented
in Section 2.2.1. The comparison of scanned data of both twins
indicates different behaviour along the niche axes. While the
measured trend of convergence is nearly constant along the niche
axis for the closed twin, the behaviour in the open twin varies
significantly along the niche as shown in Fig. 12. The impact of
the climatic conditions at this initial state seems to be low as the
measured relative humidities show only minor variations along
the niche axes. Nevertheless, the laser scan data will be in the
14

--- Page 15 ---
G. Ziefle, T. Cajuhi, N. Graebling et al. Geomechanics for Energy and the Environment 31 (2022) 100325
Table 3
List of outliers measure by the extensometer and convergence sensor and their possible causes.
Measurement Outlier Remark
Extensometer Values are larger than Perhaps due to geologic
BCD-A2 comparable extensometer heterogeneities in this area
(open twin) measurements and not constant as presented in Fig. 22.
along the borehole axis.
Convergence Values indicate different Same area than BCD-A2
(open twin) behaviour for the side walls. extensometer. Hetero-
geneities given in Fig. 22.
Extensometer While most of the extensometer Might be
BCD-A6 near measurements indicate extension, affected by seasonal effects
the surface this point indicates compression. in the open twin.
(open twin/vertical)
Convergence Significantly higher translatoric Not reproduced by other
(closed twin/ deformations than at the measurements. Possible
anchor 60) other positions. influence of fault system
(Fig. 22 (bottom left)).
Fig. 22. Closed twin with fault zones, laser scan and extensometer (top left). Open twin with fault zones, laser scan and extensometer (top right). Both twins with
system of faults that is found in both niches and extensometers (bottom left). Open twin with fault zone and extensometers (bottom right).
focus of further interpretation and statistical evaluation aiming
to better understand the impact of the climatic conditions.
In summary, the presented investigations of various kinds of
measurements, geologic investigation and numerical modelling
are demanding and difficult to communicate to non-experts. Each
one has its particular advantages and disadvantages, and their
accuracy and error-proneness have to be included in the inter-
pretation of the results.
The measured values have to be checked for their physical
plausibility. Do the different methods show different phenom-
ena? Do they picture the same trend? And the same scale? Do
they contain anomalies? Do the anomalies appear in more than
one method? What are possible reasons? It has to be kept in
mind that uncertainties due to the measuring method or inho-
mogeneities of the material may appear. A critical discussion of
the measuring method and a suitable interpretation of the data
is essential in this context.
For the interpretation of the numerical modelling results it has
to be kept in mind that the claystone is characterised by a com-
plex coupled thermal–hydraulic–mechanical–chemical–biological
material behaviour as well as by geological heterogeneities and
discontinuities on different length scales. Not all of these aspects
have been taken into account in the current numerical model,
since the latter is homogeneous. The consideration of the entire
complexity – including all known fault zones – in the numerical
model is not necessarily reasonable but potential impacts of
some single fault zones have to be determined. The constitutive
15

--- Page 16 ---
G. Ziefle, T. Cajuhi, N. Graebling et al. Geomechanics for Energy and the Environment 31 (2022) 100325
approach and the chosen material parameters have to be anal-
ysed in detail and possible sources of errors have to be taken
into account by the interpretation of the results. Moreover, an
extension of the modelling approach is required to account for
more complex material behaviour, e.g. plasticity, cracking. The
visualisation of the dominant fault zones in the near field of the
niches is a valuable tool to increase the system understanding and
investigate irregularities and outliers.
However, the usage of different methods and their combi-
nation in a comprehensive approach reduce the susceptibility
to errors and increase the process understanding. Furthermore,
it strengthens the interaction between different scientific disci-
plines and is an important basis for decision making and knowl-
edge management.
4. Conclusions
The use of different types of investigation methods has signif-
icant advantages such as the increase of the process and system
understanding. Sophisticated visualisation techniques give valu-
able support to interpret the results in a consolidating manner.
The combined interpretation of the results with consideration
of specific uncertainties and statements regarding the relevance
of different physical effects is a challenging task, but also an
important basis for the enhancement of numerical modelling ap-
proaches, which are used for the safety assessment of a potential
repository.
The investigations carried out in the context of the CD-A
experiment in the Mont Terri rock laboratory indicate the ex-
pected convergence of the niches: all measurement strategies and
numerical model show this trend in a similar and a compre-
hensive scale. Geological investigations as well as measurements
underline the heterogeneity which characterises the Opalinus
Clay. Seasonal effects are of lesser importance for the deformation
behaviour within this first period of investigation. Nevertheless,
all types of measurements show outliers which might be a result
of heterogeneities, the technical boundary conditions or due to
uncertainties within the measuring methods. Also, the numer-
ical modelling approach is characterised by uncertainties due
to various required input parameters, simplifying assumptions
within the model setup and the mathematical formulation itself,
which will never cover the reality completely. The different CD-A
experiment measurements produce outliers mostly in the same
niche regions. We therefore assume that a common reason for
these irregular results might be inhomogeneities in the host
rock originating from faults or lithological variances. Visualisation
techniques are used, which help us to combine the outcome
of different kinds of investigation like geologic investigations,
measurements and numerical modelling.
In principle, the investigations in the context of the CD-A ex-
periment focus on long-term effects such as deformations driven
by the very slow desaturation of the low permeable Opalinus
Clay. The investigations presented in this article focus on the
initial two years of the experiment and give some insights into
the geologic situation as well as the impact of the excavation and
the climatic conditions on the deformations around the niches
during this phase. The detected and visualised fault zones advise
on the geologic situation around the twin niches. The interpre-
tation of these heterogeneities with regard to their relevance
for coupled hydraulic–mechanical effects is a challenging task.
Ongoing investigations aim to identify zones with stronger or
weaker coupled HM effects.
Future work will also focus on the excavation induced and
seasonal effects within the niches and their impact on the coupled
hydraulic–mechanical processes. In this context, further hydra-
ulic-mechanically coupled effects such as swelling and shrink-
age, the evolution of desiccation cracks and their handling in
a constitutive modelling approach are of specific interest. Fur-
thermore, the continued detailed interpretation of the ongoing
measurements and the reinforced use of visualisation techniques
are foreseen. The well established multidisciplinary evaluation
presented in this article will be continued.
The interpretation of the first data sets of the CD-A experiment
in a holistic manner provides a diverse and detailed insight into
the coupled hydraulic–mechanical effects around the twin niches
in the Mont Terri rock laboratory. In summary, the presented re-
search has shown that the multidisciplinary approach combining
geological mapping, geophysical measurements, numerical mod-
elling and visualisation techniques is a promising way to better
understand complex mechanisms and the process behind them.
Thus, it can be a valuable component for the safe construction and
operation of a repository and for the long term safety assessment.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
G. Ziefle: Conceptualization, Validation, Writing – original
draft, Supervision, Project administration. T. Cajuhi: Conceptual-
ization, Methodology, Writing – review & editing. N. Graebling:
Software, Formal analysis, Visualization. D. Jaeggi: Methodology,
Validation, Formal analysis. O. Kolditz: Methodology, Visualiza-
tion. H. Kunz: Software, Formal analysis, Visualization. J. Maß-
mann: Conceptualization, Validation, Writing – review & editing.
K. Rink: Software, Formal analysis, Visualization.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared
to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
The work described in this paper was conducted in the frame-
work of the Mont Terri Project. The CD-A experiment itself is
funded by BGE (Bundesgesellschaft für Endlagerung, Germany),
BGR (Bundesanstalt für Geowissenschaften und Rohstoffe, Ger-
many) on behalf of the BMWK (Bundesministerium für Wirtschaft
und Klimaschutz, Germany), ENSI (Eidgenössisches Nuklearsicher-
heitsinspektorat, Switzerland), GRS (Gesellschaft für Anlagen-
und Reaktorsicherheit gGmbH, Germany), Helmholtz (Helmholtz-
Gemeinschaft Deutscher Forschungszentren e.V., Germany)and
swisstopo (Bundesamt für Landestopografie, Switzerland). This
support is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed in the
paper are, however, those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the Funding Organisations. We would like to acknowledge the
time and effort devoted by the unknown reviewers to contribute
constructive comments to our manuscript and to Michael Pitz for
the english review.
References
1. SKB. Äspö Hard Rock Laboratory - Annual Report 2019 . Technical Report
TR-20-10; Swedish Nuclear Fuel and Waste Management Co; 2020.
2. Andra. The Cigeo project - France’s industrial centre for geological disposal
of radioactive waste. 2020 https://international.andra.fr/sites/international/
files/2021-11/Andra-Plaquette_Cigeo-MAJ-19_08-ALR_C02_V2_EN.pdf.
3. Pfister E, Nold A. The Grimsel Rock Laboratory In-Situ Experiments in Crys-
talline Rock . International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA): IAEA; 1984 https:
//inis.iaea.org/search/search.aspx?orig_q=RN:15042256.
4. Bossart P, Bernier F, Birkholzer J, Bruggeman C, Connolly P, Dewonck S,
Fukaya M, Herfort M, Jensen M, Matray J-M, Mayor JC, Moeri A, Oyama T,
Schuster K, Shigeta N, Vietor T, Wieczorek K. Mont Terri rock laboratory,
20 years of research: introduction, site characteristics and overview of
experiments. In: Bossart P, Milnes AG, eds. Mont Terri Rock Laboratory, 20
Years: Two Decades of Research and Experimentation on Claystones for Geolog-
ical Disposal of Radioactive Waste . Cham: Springer International Publishing;
2018:3–22. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-70458-6_1,
16

--- Page 17 ---
G. Ziefle, T. Cajuhi, N. Graebling et al. Geomechanics for Energy and the Environment 31 (2022) 100325
5. Birkholzer J, Tsang C, Bond A, Hudson J, Jing L, Stephansson O. 25 Years of
DECOVALEX - Scientific advances and lessons learned from an international
research collaboration in coupled subsurface processes. Int J Rock Mech Min
Sci. 2019;122. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijrmms.2019.03.015,
6. Shaw R. FORGE - fate of repository gases: Overview and key achievements
of the FORGE project. In: Euratom 7th Framework Programme Project: FORGE .
British Geologic Survey; 2014.
7. Thatcher K, Newson R, Watson S, S. N. BEACON Bentonite Mechanical Evo-
lution: Review of Data and Models on the Mechanical Properties of Bentonite
Aavailable at the Start of Beacon . Work pacakge 2, deliverable d2.2; 2018.
8. Bilke L, Flemisch B, Kalbacher T, et al. Development of open-source
porous media simulators: Principles and experiences. Transp Porous Media .
2019;130:337–361. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11242-019-01310-1.
9. Kolditz, et al. OpenGeoSys – Open-source multi physics. 2022 https://www.
opengeosys.org/.
10. Zhang C-L, Kröhn K-P, Rothfuchs T. Applications of CODE-BRIGHT to Thermal-
Hydro-Mechanical Experiments on Clays, Vol. 94 . 2005:341–357. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/3-540-26737-9_24,
11. de Montleau P, Cela J, Moto Mpong S, Godinas A. A parallel computing
model for the acceleration of a finite element software. 2002:449–456.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/3-540-47847-7_41,
12. Cerfontaine B, Charlier R, Collin F, Taiebat M. Validation of a new elasto-
plastic constitutive model dedicated to the cyclic behaviour of brittle rock
materials. Rock Mech Rock Eng . 2017;50. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00603-
017-1258-3.
13. Israelsson JI. Short descriptions of UDEC and 3DEC. In: Stephansson O, Jing L,
Tsang C-F, eds. Coupled Thermo-Hydro-Mechanical Processes of Fractured
Media. Elsevier; 1996:523–528. In: Developments in Geotechnical Engineer-
ing; vol. 79, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0165-1250(96)80041-1, URL https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0165125096800411.
14. Hu M, Rutqvist J, Wang Y. A numerical manifold method model for
analyzing fully coupled hydro-mechanical processes in porous rock masses
with discrete fractures. Adv Water Resour . 2017;102:111–126. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.advwatres.2017.02.007, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0309170816306492,
15. Armand G, Noiret A, Zghondi J, Seyedi D. Short- and long-term behaviors
of drifts in the Callovo-Oxfordian claystone at the Meuse/Haute-Marne Un-
derground Research Laboratory. J Rock Mech Geotech Eng . 2013;5:221–230.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jrmge.2013.05.005.
16. Blümling P, Bernier F, Lebon P, Derek Martin C. The excavation dam-
aged zone in clay formations time-dependent behaviour and influence
on performance assessment. Phys Chem Earth A/B/C . 2007;32(8):588–599.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pce.2006.04.034, URL https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S1474706506002075. Clay in natural and engineered
barriers for radioactive waste confinement - Part 2.
17. Amann F, Wild KM, Loew S, Yong S, Thoeny R, Frank E. Geomechanical
behaviour of opalinus clay at multiple scales: results from mont terri
rock laboratory (Switzerland). In: Bossart P, Milnes AG, eds. Mont Terri
Rock Laboratory, 20 Years: Two Decades of Research and Experimentation
on Claystones for Geological Disposal of Radioactive Waste . Cham: Springer
International Publishing; 2018:153–173. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
319-70458-6_8,
18. Ziefle G, Matray J-M, Maßmann J, Möri A. Coupled hydraulic-mechanical
simulation of seasonally induced processes in the Mont Terri rock laboratory
(Switzerland). Swiss J Geosci . 2017. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00015-016-
0252-1.
19. Kneuker T, Furche M. Capturing the structural and compositional variability
of Opalinus Clay: constraints from multidisciplinary investigations of Mont
Terri drill cores (Switzerland). Environ Earth Sci . 2021;80. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1007/s12665-021-09708-1.
20. Nussbaum C, Kloppenburg A, Caër T, Bossart P. Tectonic evolution around
the Mont Terri rock laboratory, northwestern Swiss Jura: constraints from
kinematic forward modelling. In: Bossart P, Milnes AG, eds. Mont Terri
Rock Laboratory, 20 Years: Two Decades of Research and Experimentation
on Claystones for Geological Disposal of Radioactive Waste . Cham: Springer
International Publishing; 2018:41–68. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-
70458-6_3,
21. Hostettler B, Reisdorf AG, Jaeggi D, Deplazes G, Bläsi H, Morard A, Feist-
Burkhardt S, Waltschew A, Dietze V, Menkveld-Gfeller U. Litho- and
biostratigraphy of the opalinus clay and bounding formations in the mont
terri rock laboratory (Switzerland). In: Bossart P, Milnes AG, eds. Mont Terri
Rock Laboratory, 20 Years: Two Decades of Research and Experimentation
on Claystones for Geological Disposal of Radioactive Waste . Cham: Springer
International Publishing; 2018:23–39. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-
70458-6_2,
22. Hale S, Ries X, Jaeggi D, Blum P. Mechanical and hydraulic properties of
the excavation damaged zone (EDZ) in the Opalinus Clay of the Mont
Terri rock laboratory, Switzerland. Solid Earth . 2021;12:1581–1600. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.5194/se-12-1581-2021.
23. Martin C, Giger S, Lanyon G. Behaviour of weak shales in underground
environments. Rock Mech Rock Eng . 2016;49:673–687. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1007/s00603-015-0860-5.
24. Guglielmi Y, Nussbaum C, Jeanne P, Rutqvist J, Cappa F, Birkholzer J.
Complexity of fault rupture and fluid leakage in shale: Insights from a
controlled fault activation experiment. J. Geophysical Research: Solid Earth .
2020;125. http://dx.doi.org/10.1029/2019JB017781.
25. Kakurina M, Guglielmi Y, Nussbaum C, Valley B. In situ direct displacement
information on fault reactivation during fluid injection. Rock Mech Rock Eng .
2021;53:4313–4328. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00603-020-02160-w.
26. Zhang C-L, Laurich B. Mechanical behavior of sandy facies of Opalinus Clay
under different load conditions. J Rock Mech Geotech Eng . 2020;12:223–241.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jrmge.2019.09.005.
27. Pardoen B, Bésuelle P, Dal Pont S, Cosenza P, Desrues J. Effect of claystone
small-scale characteristics on the variability of micromechanical response
and on microcracking modelling. In: Barla M, Di Donna A, Sterpi D, eds.
Challenges and Innovations in Geomechanics: Project: Accounting for the Spatial
Variability of Argillite’s Properties Through a Multi-Scale Numeric-Experimental
Approach.. Springer; 2020. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-64514-4_
52.
28. Bond A, Millard A, Nakama S, Zhang C, Garritte B. Approaches for repre-
senting hydro-mechanical coupling between sub-surface excavations and
argillaceous porous media at the ventilation experiment, Mont Terri. J Rock
Mech Geotech Eng . 2013;5:85–96.
29. Bock H. RA Experiment: Updated Review of the Rock Mechanics Properties of
the Opalinus Clay of the Mont Terri URL based on Laboratory and Field Testing .
Mont Terri Technical Report, 2008–04; 2009.
30. Ziefle G, Bossart P, Costabel S, Czaikowski O, Furche M, Graupner B,
Hesser J, Jaeggi D, Jantschik K, Kolditz O, Königer F, Kunz H, Maßmann J,
Nicaty C, Rebscher D, Rink K, Schuhmann R, Wieczorek K. Mont Terri, CD-A
Experiment: Installation Report TN 2020-41 . Mont Terri Technical Note; 2021.
31. Ziefle G, Cajuhi T, Condamin S, Costabel S, Czaikowski O, Fourriére A,
Friedenberg L, Furche M, Graebling N, Graupner B, Hesser J, Jaeggi D,
Jantschik K, Kneuker T, Kolditz O, Königer F, Kunz H, Laurich B, Maßmann J,
Ostertag-Henning C, Rebscher D, Rink K, Rühaak W, Schefer S, Schuh-
mann R, Wengler M, Wieczorek K. From process to system understanding
with multi-disciplinary investigation methods: set-up and first results of
the CD-A experiment (Mont Terri rock laboratory). In: Safety of Nuclear
Waste Disposal, 1 . Deutschland: Bundesamt für die Sicherheit der nuklearen
Entsorgung (BASE); 2021:79–81. http://dx.doi.org/10.5194/sand-1-79-2021.
32. Cajuhi T, Maßmann J, Ziefle G. Building the bridge between safety require-
ments and numerical modeling: an example considering crack development
of Opalinus clay in laboratory and field scales. In: Safety of Nuclear
Waste Disposal, 1 . Deutschland: Bundesamt für die Sicherheit der nuklearen
Entsorgung (BASE); 2021:165–167. http://dx.doi.org/10.5194/sand-1-165-
2021.
33. Jaeggi D, Galletti M, Amacher F, Dunst R, Nussbaum C, Raselli R,
Ringeisen M, Schefer S, Bossart P. Mont Terri Project, Technical Report 2018-
04, Gallery 2018: Excavation and Geological Documentation . Switzerland:
swisstopo; 2020.
34. Jaeggi D, Laurich B, Nussbaum C, Schuster K, Connolly P. Tectonic structure
of the ‘‘Main Fault’’ in the Opalinus Clay, Mont Terri rock laboratory
(Switzerland). In: Bossart P, Milnes AG, eds. Mont Terri Rock Laboratory, 20
Years: Two Decades of Research and Experimentation on Claystones for Geolog-
ical Disposal of Radioactive Waste . Cham: Springer International Publishing;
2018:69–86. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-70458-6_4,
35. Ziefle G, Bossart P, Costabel S, Czaikowski O, Furche M, Graupner B, Hesser J,
Jaeggi D, Kneuker T, Kolditz O, Königer F, Maßmann J, Rink K, Schuhmann R,
Schuster K, Vowinckel B, Wieczorek K. Influence of humidity on cyclic and
longterm deformations: CD-A experiment, Mont Terri Rock Laboratory. In:
Innovative Feuchtemessung in Forschung und Praxis: Berichtsband zur Tagung
2019,Karlsruhe, 10.-11. Oktober 2019 . Schuhmann, R.; 2019:65–78.
36. sigeom. Mont Terri Project, Convergence Monitoring by Laser Scanning in
Niches 3 and 4, Gallery 18 . Mont Terri Technical Note; 2020.
37. Schwab L, Gisiger J, Rösli U. Mont Terri, CD-A Experiment, Installation of
Extensometers and Climate Sensors and Configuration of DAS - Installation
Report TN 2019-86 . Mont Terri Technical Note; 2021.
38. Kolditz O, Bauer S, Bilke L, Böttcher N, Delfs J-O, Fischer T, Görke UJ,
Kalbacher T, Kosakowski G, McDermott C, et al. OpenGeoSys: an
open-source initiative for numerical simulation of thermo-hydro-
mechanical/chemical (THM/C) processes in porous media. Environ Earth Sci .
2012;67(2):589–599.
39. Kolditz O, Görke U-J, Konietzky H, Maßmann J, Nest M, Steeb H, Wuttke F,
Nagel TE eds, GeomInt–Mechanical Integrity of Host Rocks . Springer; 2021. In:
Terrestrial Environmental Sciences; http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-
61909-1,
17

--- Page 18 ---
G. Ziefle, T. Cajuhi, N. Graebling et al. Geomechanics for Energy and the Environment 31 (2022) 100325
40. Gawin D, Schrefler B. Thermo-hydro-mechanical analysis of partially
saturated porous materials. Eng Comput . 1996;13(7):113–143.
41. Bishop AW, Blight G. Some aspects of effective stress in saturated and partly
saturated soils. Geotechnique. 1963;13(3):177–197.
42. Lewis R, Schrefler B. The Finite Element Method in the Static and Dynamic
Deformation and Consolidation of Porous Media . mendes; 1998.
43. Richards LA. Capillary conduction of liquids through porous mediums.
Physics. 1931;1(5):318–333.
44. Van Genuchten MT. A closed-form equation for predicting the hy-
draulic conductivity of unsaturated soils. Soil Sci Soc Am J . 1980;44(5):
892–898.
45. Jahn S, Mrugalla S, Stark L. Endlagerstandortmodell SÜD–Teil II:
Zusammenstellung von gesteinseigenschaften für den langzeitsicherheit-
snachweis. In: Projekt ANSICHT: Methodik und Anwendungsbezug eines
Sicherheits-und Nachweiskonzeptes für ein HAW-Endlager im Tonstein .
Hannover: BGR; 2016.
46. Martin C, Lanyon G. Measurement of in-situ stress in weak rocks at
Mont Terri Rock Laboratory, Switzerland. Int J Rock Mech Min Sci .
2003;40(7–8):1077–1088.
47. Friedenberg L, Czaikowski O, Wieczorek K, Ziefle G. Interpretative modelling
of selected in-situ measurements obtained at the cyclic deformation exper-
iment at mont terri RL. In: 8th International Conference on Clays in Natural
and Engineered Barriers for Radioactive Waste Confinement, to be held from
13-16th June 2022 . Nancy, France: 2022.
48. Garitte B, Nguyen T, Barnichon J, Graupner B, Lee C, Maekawa K,
Manepally C, Ofoegbu G, Dasgupta B, Fedors R, et al. Modelling the Mont
Terri HE-d experiment for the Thermal–Hydraulic–Mechanical response of
a bedded argillaceous formation to heating. Environmental Earth Sciences .
2017;76(9):345.
49. Cajuhi T, Sanavia L, De Lorenzis L. Phase-field modeling of fracture in
variably saturated porous media. Comput Mech . 2018;61(3):299–318.
50. Rink K, Bilke L, Kolditz O. Visualisation strategies for environmental mod-
elling data. Environ Earth Sci . 2014;72(10):3857–3868. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1007/s12665-013-2970-2.
51. Ahrens J, Geveci B, Law C. ParaView: An end-user tool for large data
visualization. In: Hansen C, Johnson C, eds. The Visualization Handbook .
Elsevier; 2005.
52. Schroeder W, Martin K, Lorensen B. Visualization Toolkit: An Object-Oriented
Approach to 3D Graphics (4th Edition) . Kitware, Inc.; 2006.
18