--- Page 1 ---
International Journal of Rock Mechanics & Mining Sciences 174 (2024) 105624
Available online 13 January 2024
1365-1609/© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc/4.0/).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
International Journal of Rock Mechanics and Mining Sciences
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijrmms
CD-A twin niches in the Mont Terri Rock Laboratory: Characterization and
interpretation of hydraulic parameters with regard to safety aspects
Gesa Ziefle a,∗, Tuanny Cajuhia, Stephan Costabela, Antoine Fourriérea, Markus Furchea,
Jana Gerowski a, Tilo Kneukera, Franz Königerb, Jobst Maßmanna
a Federal Institute for Geosciences and Natural Resources (BGR), Hanover, Germany
b Ingenieurgesellschaft für Sensorik in der Umwelttechnik mbH (ISU), Karlsruhe, Germany
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Mont Terri Project
Characterization of opalinus claystone
CD-A experiment
Coupled hydraulic–mechanical effects
Geology
Geophysical measurements
A B S T R A C T
In the Mont Terri Rock Laboratory (Switzerland), a comprehensive interdisciplinary exploration program is
carried out to increase knowledge about long-term coupled hydraulic–mechanical effects in Opalinus Clay. As
these effects are of significant interest regarding the stability and integrity of a potential storage facility for high
radioactive waste, the ‘‘Influence of humidity on cyclic and longterm deformations’’ (CD-A) experiment aims to
characterize the Opalinus Clay, especially its heterogeneous sandy facies, and to investigate the evolution of the
water content, pressure and deformation in the formation. This article provides an overview of measurement
examinations and geologic investigations carried out in the context of the CD-A experiment. The twin niches of
the CD-A experiment are located in the upper sandy facies of the Opalinus Clay which is characterized by the
existence of different subfacies types and fault zones. This contribution focuses on the detailed characterization
of the claystone, while the evolution of the water content. Combined geophysical and geological investigations
during the first two years after the excavation of the niches have been carried out. They indicate that the
subfacies type and pre-existing fault zones do not affect the distribution of water content severely, which
could be an essential finding in the context of detection procedures for potential high level waste (HLW)
repositories. Furthermore, miniseismic as well as pulse tests indicate clearly, that the extent of the excavation
damaged zone (EDZ) strongly depends on the climatic conditions in the underground galleries: After 1.5 years
the EDZ and the increase of permeability is much more pronounced in the open than in the closed twin. Future
work aims on an increased process understanding based on a verified constitutive model for Opalinus Clay
and a comprehensive system understanding considering long-term effects due to climatic conditions as well as
the impact of geotechnical boundary conditions and heteregeneities.
1. Introduction
The comprehension of coupled hydraulic–mechanical (HM) effects
in claystone is of significant importance for the safety assessment
of a potential repository for high-level radioactive waste (HLW). In
particular the various coupling effects are to be regarded as relevant:
For example, the water content not only influences numerous mate-
rial parameters but also potential plastic effects and crack formation
behavior. These mechanical effects in turn have a direct influence
on stress state and potential flow processes and thus on the integrity
and also stability of the repository. Consequently, the applicability of
constitutive material models for claystone and thus also the safety
assessment is essentially dependent on the correct formulation of the
hydraulic–mechanical couplings. Here, the constitutive material model
and also the correct parametrization of the material are of significant
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: gesa.ziefle@bgr.de (G. Ziefle).
importance. As described, the coupled effects depend essentially on
the hydraulic situation in the Opalinus Clay - especially on the water
content, which is not necessary homogeneous. Therefore, a focus of
the presented investigations is also related on material heterogeneities
and their impact on safety aspects. The multi-disciplinary investigations
and their results form a basis for a well-founded characterization of
the rock, taking the water content into account. The presented inves-
tigations are carried out in the context of the ‘‘Influence of humidity
on cyclic and longterm deformations’’ (CD-A) experiment as part of
the Mont Terri Project, which is introduced in Section 2 . This work is
motivated by the need of a detailed understanding of the geotechnical
system and its properties as it is required to evaluate the stability
and integrity over long time periods. It provides a comprehensive
characterization and combined interpretation of the material based
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijrmms.2023.105624
Received 22 April 2022; Received in revised form 13 November 2023; Accepted 9 December 2023

--- Page 2 ---
International Journal of Rock Mechanics and Mining Sciences 174 (2024) 105624
2
G. Ziefle et al.
on geologic and geophysical investigations, building the basis for nu-
merical approaches to capture coupled hydraulic–mechanical effects.
Claystone is a very complex material, characterized by anisotropy and
often heterogeneities. These have significant impact on the hydraulic
and mechanical boundary conditions, like the moisture content and
the stress state, on the material behavior. Various laboratory, in-situ
and theoretical investigations with this regard have also been car-
ried out and discussed in the literature (Refs. 1–4 amongst others),
indicating a high impact of the claystone composition on the ma-
terial parameters and especially on the transport properties like gas
and water permeabilities and on the swelling behavior. Besides the
anisotropic conditions, the saturation plays an important role on on
the coupled effects, influencing the stiffness, strength and swelling
capacity of the rock, as discussed in Refs. 3, 5, 6. Another specific
focus of various investigations is the interplay between the material
properties, e.g. permeability, and the evolution of the EDZ. 7–9 In this
context, a stronger influence of coupled HM effects is observed in
fractured regions, e.g. increase of permeability. Ref. 10 states that the
evolution of permeability in excavation damaged zones is crucial to
investigate, especially during cyclic loading. Due to the importance of
this kind of material conditions, geophysical and geohydraulic methods
are highly requested in claystone research. In various geophysical fields
of interest, research aims on a relationship between geophysical logging
data and mechanical material properties. In the last years, various con-
stitutive approaches for effects in claystone are discussed and illustrate
the difficulty of correctly representing the complex material behavior
even under consideration of various boundary conditions. Ref. 11 pre-
sented a pragmatic approach to abstract the excavation damaged zone
around tunnels of a geological radioactive waste repository in numer-
ical models. Combined presentations of experimental and numerical
investigations are presented in Refs. 12, 13. For handling coupled HM
effects in numerical simulations, coupled numerical approaches have
been proposed in the nineteens by Refs. 14, 15 amongst others. The
work on hand focuses on the geologic interpretation and the description
of various types of geophysical measurements conducted in boreholes
around an excavation aiming on a characterization of the host rock in-
cluding heterogeneities at different scales such as subfacies types, fault
zones and the zone, which is affected by the excavation. In this context,
the literature distinguishes between excavation damaged zone (EDZ),
with unreversible changes and the excavation disturbed zone (EdZ),
where changes may be in the elastic range coming along with reversibil-
ity. Here, the designation EDZ (excavation damaged zone) is used, even
if the geophysical measurements do not necessarily provide information
about the reversibility. The combined interpretation - also focusing on
the water content distribution - provides a detailed characterization of
the host rock and additional information about hydraulic parameters,
like resistivity, seismic wave velocity, lithologic description, permittiv-
ity, permeability, and water content. The setup of the CD-A experiment
and its twin niches enable to compare these parameters under different
conditions. For that, we discuss the corresponding results directly and
within 1.5 years after the excavations and provide an overview of the
strengths and limitations of the different investigation strategies. The
impact of the opening conditions as well as heterogeneities is discussed
and a comprehensive characterization of the Opalinus Clay with ad-
ditional information on hydraulic parameters can be provided. The
presented data aims on further understanding of hydraulic effects and
related further development of coupled constitutive material models in
heterogeneous claystone.
2. CD-A experiment in the Mont Terri project
The presented investigations are carried out in the context of the
‘‘Influence of humidity on cyclic and longterm deformations’’ (CD-A)
experiment as part of the Mont Terri Project, which is introduced
in Ref. 16. The Mont Terri Project is an international research project
aiming at the geological and geotechnical characterization of Opalinus
Clay as summarized in Ref. 17. The Mont Terri rock laboratory is
located in the western part of Switzerland in the Jura mountains and
hosts various field experiments to investigate the coupled thermal,
hydraulic, mechanical, chemical and biological (THMBC) processes in
the claystone. Information about the lithology of the Opalinus Clay in
the area of the Mont Terri rock laboratory can be found in Refs. 17–19.
The tectonic structure of the main fault is discussed in Ref. 20, and the
geomechanical behavior at multiple scales is summarized in Ref. 21.
Ref. 22 discuss multidisciplinary data from petrographic and structural
studies, geophysical borehole logging and permeability tests to assess
the impact of brittle faults on barrier capability. And an updated review
of the rock mechanics properties of the Opalinus Clay of the Mont
Terri rock laboratory based on laboratory23–25 and combined with field
testing can be found in Ref. 26. The aim of the CD-A experiment is
the evaluation of HM long-term processes. The experiment is charac-
terized by a comprehensive measuring program including geological,
geotechnical and geophysical characterization. The unique setting of
the twin niches enables an understanding of the unrevealed influence
of varying climatic conditions on the host rock. It assesses the impact of
the lithology on the subfacies scale on barrier relevant properties like
water content and resistivity. Furthermore, it investigates the extent
and hydraulic characteristics of the EDZ with regard to potential flow
paths. This article summarizes the results of the first two years after
excavation of the twin niches.
The excavation of the CD-A twin niches has been carried out as
part of the extension of the Mont Terri Rock Laboratory (Ref. 27)
in September 2019. The niches were excavated in fall 2019 near the
Gallery 2018 in an area characterized by the upper sandy facies of
the Opalinus Clay as shown in Fig. 1. With a diameter of 2.3 m and
a length of 11 m, both are oriented perpendicular to the strike of
bedding. The surface of the claystone in the niches is not covered
with any kind of stabilizing support. Consequently, a direct interaction
between the humidity and temperature in the niche and the claystone
is possible and measurable. The aim of investigating the twin niches is a
direct comparison of the different climatic conditions within the niches
(open/closed) and their impact on the hydraulic–mechanical effects in
the host rock. While the open twin is characterized by the seasonal
variation of temperature and relative humidity as in the rest of the
rock laboratory, the conditions in the closed twin provide a constantly
high relative humidity and very low changes in the temperature as
well. As a result of these boundary conditions, there will be an ongoing
desaturation of the host rock around the open twin, which is not
expected around the closed twin. The evolution of relative humidity
as measured in the niches is depicted in Fig. 2.
The complex measuring program of the experiment focuses on the
climatic conditions within the twin niches, the characterization of the
host rock, and the evolution of the deformation, saturation and pore
pressure as it is presented in Ref. 28 and Ref. 29 and summarized in
Fig. 3 and Table 1. Within a few weeks after excavation, the measuring
system (Extensometer, Taupe system, Mini-Piezometer, Climatic de-
vices, Convergence measurements and further more) in and around the
niches has been installed and the climatization has been adjusted as de-
scribed in Ref. 16. Beside the boreholes that are used for the permanent
installation of measurements like TDR technique-based Taupe system,
mini-piezometer and extensometer measurements, several additional
boreholes have been drilled in September 2019 and March 2021 to
investigate the Opalinus Clay around the niches with core and borehole
measurements. Methods like the electric resistivity tomography (ERT),
the nuclear magnetic resonance measurements (NMR), the Calcium
Carbide method (CCM), pulse tests, evapometer measurements, bore-
hole and core scans are used in the context of characterization of the
rock. They provide information about certain material parameters like
the electric resistivity, the permittivity and process variables like the
water content directly after drilling. Furthermore, geological investi-
gations of drill cores and of the rocks cropping out at the surface
of the niches and the gallery walls have been carried out (Ref. 30).

--- Page 3 ---
International Journal of Rock Mechanics and Mining Sciences 174 (2024) 105624
3
G. Ziefle et al.
Fig. 1. Top: Location of the CD-A experiment in the Mont Terri URL (top) and view into the open (bottom left/blue frame) and the closed (bottom right/red frame) niche. (For
interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Fig. 2. 5-day average of measured relative humidity within the twin niches.
A comparative interpretation of the investigated parameters provide
information concerning the distribution of different litho-stratigraphic
(sub)units, the extent of an EDZ and a borehole disturbed zone (BDZ)
as well as the occurrence and properties of tectonic fault zones and
individual faults (Table 2). To complement the experimental campaign,
numerical calculations are performed to provide information about the
water content and the importance of the mentioned heterogeneities
on the coupled HM processes. 31 Additional measurements focusing on

--- Page 4 ---
International Journal of Rock Mechanics and Mining Sciences 174 (2024) 105624
4
G. Ziefle et al.
Fig. 3. Location of boreholes in the vicinity of the CD-A twin niches.
Table 1
Measurement campaign of the CD-A experiment. The investigations discussed here focus
on the characterization of claystone and the related saturation including the information
about the climatic conditions.
To be investigated Kind of measurement Parameter Unit
Characterization ERT (borehole) Electric resistivity Ω m
of claystone ERT (niche profile) Electric resistivity Ω m
MSM (borehole) Elastic wave velocity m/s
permeability (borehole) permeability m 2
Geologic characterization Lithology –
Climatic conditions Air humidity %
Temperature ◦C
Atmospheric pressure Pa
Saturation Taupe measurements Permittivity –
NMR (core) Water content m 3/m3
CCM (core) Water content m 3/m3
NMR (niche surface) Water content m 3/m3
Evapometer Conductivity m/s
Pressure Mini-piezometer Pore pressure Pa
Psychrometer Suction Pa
Thermo-hygrometer Suction Pa
Deformation Extensometer Displacement m
Convergence (niche) Displacement m
Laserscan (niche profile) Displacement μm
the deformation behavior such as laser scans, convergence and exten-
someter measurements are not part of this article and are discussed
e.g. in Ref. 32.
The characterization of the Opalinus Clay around the twin niches
is carried out with geologic and mineralogical investigations as well
as electric resistivity measurements (ERT), use of the mini seismic
method (MSM), pulse tests and evapometer measurements. Focusing on
the water content around the niches, the nuclear magnetic resonance
method (NMR), the Calcium-Carbide Method (CCM) and Taupe/TDR
measurements are used.
3. Geology and lithology
This paper focuses on a combined interpretation of lithological
investigations with related geophysical measurements, also aiming on
the determination of the water content. Similar approaches for the
characterization have already been discussed in Ref. 33, who conducted
multidisciplinary investigations of Mont Terri drill cores to capture the
structural and compositional variability of different sub-facies types
of Opalinus Clay. The study states; the variability depends signifi-
cantly on the direction relative to the bedding plane and underline
the proposed composition scheme of geological subfacies types con-
ducted by Ref. 34. Furthermore, the presented investigations point out
the impact of structural and compositional heterogeneities on barrier
properties like mechanical behavior, radionuclide retention capacity,
swelling capacity and also the behavior under thermal load. Further
in-situ investigations, as reported in Refs. 33 –35, use high-resolution
seismic tomography for the characterization of the anisotropic material
behavior of the shaly and carbonate-rich sandy facies of the Opalinus
Clay in the Mont Terri rock laboratory. A seismotectonic analysis of
the Mont Terri rock laboratory has been presented by Ref. 36 . In
general, the Opalinus Clay in the Mont Terri Rock Laboratory can be
divided into three facies types: the shaly, the sandy and the carbonate-
rich sandy facies type. Until recently, the shaly and the lower sandy
facies type of the Opalinus Clay were in the focus of the geological
investigations.37 The construction of the new Gallery 2018, where the
twin niches of the CD-A experiment are located, now provides the
opportunity for a detailed characterization of the upper sandy facies
type. A detailed study and interpretation of the geology around the twin
niches can be found in Ref. 30 .
The sandy facies consists of a silty-sandy claystone with abundant
thin elongated sand lenses, mm-thick bedded or laminated sand lay-
ers, calcareous and often bioturbated micritic nodules and biodetritic
horizons. Quartz grains inside the sand layers are commonly cemented
by carbonates, however, the cementation is not always continuous. In
the Mont Terri Rock Laboratory, the sandy facies can be subdivided
into an upper and a lower sandy facies type. Both are characterized
by differences in composition. Compared to the lower sandy facies,
the upper sandy facies includes a higher quantity of clay-rich inter-
layers. Furthermore, the niches are characterized by variously dipping
faults and fault zones that are summarized in Fig. 4 . The geologic
investigation indicates fault planes parallel to the bedding as well as
non-bedding parallel fault planes are present. A disintegration of the
fault rock along brittle microshears into duplex-like tectonites was
observed at several locations. This scaly clay fabric indicates distributed
shear along numerous discrete fault planes (compare to Ref. 38). Some
of the encountered fault planes are filled with calcite (Ref. 30 ).
3.1. Core and borehole investigations
High-resolution core photographs were taken using a DMT CoreS-
can3 system specifically designed to take 360 ◦ photographs. For this

--- Page 5 ---
International Journal of Rock Mechanics and Mining Sciences 174 (2024) 105624
5
G. Ziefle et al.
Table 2
Investigation methods and available information.
Info:
Method: Lith. ERT MSM NMR/CCM Taupe Pulse test Numerics
Subfacies type + + – – – – (*)
EDZ – – + – + (+) (*)
Fault zones + – – – (+) (+) (*)
Water content – + – + (+) – +
[ +: information available, -: no information available. *: may provide information about their importance on physical effects, (): limited information ]. Lith. = Lithological
investigations on drill cores.
Fig. 4. Structural geology of the twin niches.
Source: Extracted from Ref. 30 .
purpose, the core is rotated around its longitudinal axis while a digital
camera records the picture. Core scans have been carried out on drill
cores from all studied boreholes (BCD-A1 to BCD-A4, BCD-A7, BCD-
A8, BCD-A24 to BCD-A27) while optical borehole images (OBI) have
been acquired using an QL40-OBI-2G borehole televiewer (Mount So-
pris Instruments) in boreholes BCD-A24 to BCD-A27. Borehole scanner
data was captured by a Mount Sopris SCOUT data acquisition system.
Furthermore, water content investigations at the cores have been car-
ried out using NMR (nuclear magnetic resonance) and CCM (Calcium-
Carbide) methods as will be explained in Sections 4.5 and 4.6 . A
summary of these investigations can also be found in the supplementary
data.
3.2. Lithological interpretations
Structural–lithological investigations form the basis for rock charac-
terization and exploration. On site, the swisstopo team first described
the non-oriented drill cores visually. The drill core material from the
CD-A experiment niches has been further characterized at the BGR core
repositories in Berlin and Hannover (Germany).
The investigated drill cores capture one of the five major facies
types of the Opalinus Clay and therefore allow to study the intra-facies
variability of the upper sandy facies type. In this context, the subfacies
classification proposed by Ref. 34 provides a framework for an in-depth
characterization of lithological intra-facies variations for the Opalinus
Clay. Each subfacies type is characterized by a distinctive color, grain
size, fabric and lithology. By combining the high-resolution core scans
with detailed petrographic-structural observations directly on the drill
core material, lithological profiles including the subfacies types clas-
sification according to Ref. 34 were produced and are presented in
Fig. 10, Fig. 11, Fig. 8, and Fig. 9 in comparison with the results of
other investigation techniques. In order to further quantify the intra-
facies variability, it is planned to perform additional microstructural
and mineralogical–geochemical analyses on the core material in the
near future.
4. Measurement examination
In this section the various measurement methods are introduced:
Electric Resistivity Tomography (ERT), Mini Seismic Method (MSM),
the pulse tests, evapometer measurements, Time Domain Reflectom-
etry (TDR/Taupe), Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR), and Calcium
Carbide Method (CCM). These measurements focus on the characteri-
zation of the claystone by investigating the electric resistivity, seismic
velocities, water content, the and the permeability of the host rock.

--- Page 6 ---
International Journal of Rock Mechanics and Mining Sciences 174 (2024) 105624
6
G. Ziefle et al.
Fig. 5. Schematic representation of a resistance measurement in four-point
arrangement over a layered half space (after Ref. 40 ).
4.1. Electric resistivity tomography (ERT)
ERT measurements provide robust results regarding the detection
and in situ characterization of structural and sedimentary hetero-
geneities in claystone (Ref. 22, Ref. 39 and Ref. 33).
To determine the spatial resistivity distribution (or its reciprocal –
conductivity) in the ground, a direct current (DC) is introduced through
two point electrodes (A, B). The produced electrical field is measured
using two other electrodes (M, N), as shown in Fig. 5. A point electrode
introducing an electrical current 𝐼 will generate a potential 𝑉𝑟 at a
distance 𝑟 from the source. Assuming two current electrodes (A, B) that
introduce a current 𝐼 into the homogeneous half-space, the potential
difference between the electrodes M and 𝑁 is calculated as
𝛥𝑉 = 𝜌𝐼
[
1
2𝜋
(
1
𝐴𝑀
− 1
𝐴𝑁
− 1
𝐵𝑀
+ 1
𝐵𝑁
)]
, (1)
where 𝑃1𝑃2 denotes the distance between two points 𝑃1 and 𝑃2. Replac-
ing the factor in square brackets by 𝐶, we obtain the resistivity of the
homogeneous half space as follows:
𝜌 = 𝐶 𝛥𝑉
𝐼 (2)
The parameter 𝐶 is called configuration factor or geometric factor.
For inhomogeneous conditions it gives the resistivity of an equivalent
homogeneous half-space. For this value the term apparent resistivity
𝜌𝑎 in Ωm is introduced, which is normally assigned to the center
of the electrode array. Multi-electrode resistivity meters enable the
measurement of 2D resistivity surveys (2D imaging). The advantages
of this kind of measurements are their high vertical and horizontal
resolution along the profile.
The geoelectrical measurements were performed using the high-
resolution earth resistivity meter 4-point light 10 W (Lippmann Geo-
physikalische Messgeräte), controlled by the software GeoTest
(Geophysik–Dr. Rauen). Within the CD-A experiment, high-resolution
borehole measurements along exploratory boreholes are used to char-
acterize the rock. These are carried out once shortly after the drilling
is completed using the BGR probe GB100-15 (Ref. 33 ). It consists of
100 electrodes with a spacing of 15 mm. The tool has a diameter of
80 mm (for typical hole diameters of 86 mm), but greater diameters
can be adapted. The electrodes can be extended pneumatically for
the required connection to the borehole wall. The spatial resolution is
limited by 2 times the electrode distance (30 mm), the maximum depth
of investigation is about 30 cm perpendicular to the borehole wall. The
chosen electrode configuration represents a Wenner- 𝛼 setup (Ref. 40).
A numerical inversion process is necessary for data analysis and
interpretation. The measured apparent resistivities along the borehole
are thus transformed into a spatial model, discretized into a distinct
number of elements of homogeneous resistivity, taking into account
the electrode geometry. The forward operator in the inversion process
is generally obtained by finite-difference (FD) or finite-element (FE)
methods. For our data, the non-commercial software package BERT
(Boundless Electrical Resistivity Tomography) developed by T. Günther
(Leibniz Institute of Applied Geophysics, Hannover) and C. Rücker
(BASE) is usedc. For further details, see Ref. 41 and Ref. 42 .
4.2. Mini seismic method (MSM)
Seismic velocity measurements make use of elastic waves excited at
defined source locations. The seismic wave field is recorded in terms of
travel time and amplitude at certain receiver positions. Taking into ac-
count the acquisition geometry and travel time, propagation velocity of
direct pressure (p-) waves 𝑣𝑝 and secondary shear (s-) waves 𝑣𝑠 can be
calculated. Typical velocity values for the relevant lithology obtained
by in-situ borehole measurements at the Mont Terri laboratory are
discussed in Refs. 22, 43 and for laboratory investigations by Ref. 44 .
The data indicates for the intact shaly facies of OPA P-wave velocity
values around 2500 m/s, for the carbonate rich areas values between
3000 and 4000 m/s, and for the sandy facies values around 3000 to
3500 m/s. In fault zones an average decrease of 200 to 400 m/s relative
to the base value was observed. Near excavations the measured values
for the intact and damaged zones are varying, reflected by the highly
variable seismic signal with fluctuations from 1500 m/s up to 2600 m/s
as discussed by Ref. 22.
Depending on the respective survey geometry, travel time data can
be used to deduce a velocity model along travel paths of the waves
in two (2D) or three spatial dimensions (3D). If repeat survey data
are available, temporal data can be included and velocity changes
determined (4D), to permit geological process analyses. For the acqui-
sition of interval velocity data, special interval velocity measurements
(IVM) are carried out. In the CD-A experiment, a seismic borehole
probe with one seismic source and seven receivers is moved stepwise
along the surveyed boreholes with 5 cm intervals. At each step, the
probe actuator and sensors are pneumatically attached to the borehole
wall to establish sufficient mechanical coupling for the generation and
detection of the emitted impulsive (‘‘shot’’) elastic waves ( Fig. 6). The
wave signals are recorded with seven receiver channels and one source
channel (trigger channel).
4.3. Pulse tests and evapometer measurements
Information about the permeability of the host rock is gained with
pulse tests in the boreholes BCD-A24 to BCD-A27 and with evapometer
measurements in borehole BFM-D19. While the boreholes BCD-A24
and BCD-A26 are aligned in vertical direction, boreholes BCD-A25 and
BCD-A27 are aligned in horizontal direction and BFM-D19 nearly in
horizontal direction as presented in Fig. 3. The twin niches are located
perpendicular to the strike of bedding with an inclination of 55-60 ◦ in
the direction of the niches (145/59) which is summarized in Ref. 30 in
detail. The pulse tests have been carried out in March 2021, 1.5 years
after excavation of the niches, while the evapometer measurements
have been carried out in summer (June/July) 2020 about 10 months
after excavation.
In the pulse tests, a modified COMDRILL double piston packer
system (http://www.comdrill.de/) with a static interval length of 10 cm
is used. A non-reactive nitrogen gas at standard temperature and pres-
sure was used as injection medium with an injection pressure up to
1 bar. The pulse test is characterized by the injection of the gas and
hereafter a monitoring of the pressure evolution within the test interval.
This allows the determination of the intrinsic permeability of a 3D
volume in the near field around a 10 cm long borehole interval. A
c https://gitlab.com/resistivity-net/bert

--- Page 7 ---
International Journal of Rock Mechanics and Mining Sciences 174 (2024) 105624
7
G. Ziefle et al.
Fig. 6. Principle of seismic velocity measurements. Top: Emitted and recorded wave field at 0 to 40 cm distance. Blue: sketch of pressure wave propagation. Red: sketch of shear
wave propagation. Below: geometry of interval velocity measurements (IVM, single hole). (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred
to the web version of this article.)
Fig. 7. Measured permeabilities with pulse tests (BCD-A24 to BCD-A27) and evapometer (BFM-D19) in open (blue) and closed (red) twin in horizontal (contour) and vertical
(filled) drilling direction. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
maximum error from experimental and evaluation sources is half the
order of magnitude. More information about these tests is summarized
in Ref. 22 . The measured interval permeabilities in m 2 indicate that
the permeability in the damaged zone can be up to seven orders of
magnitude higher than in the undisturbed host rock as expected and
also already described in Ref. 45 (two orders of magnitude higher)
amongst others. These high permeabilities are found near the surface
of the niche and decrease to the original value in the range up to
1.0 m distance from the surface. Furthermore, a significantly higher
permeability within the first 1 m of the host rock around the open twin
(presented in blue) than in the closed twin (presented in red) is found
in March 2021, 1.5 years after excavation (June/July 2020). In the ver-
tical boreholes, this decrease is followed by another increase at depths
around 1 m, followed by permeability values as in the undisturbed rock
from a depth of about 1.2 m. As expected, the reported in-situ measured
permeabilities are slightly lower than related results of laboratory tests.
Ref. 46 reported higher hydraulic conductivities around 1 ⋅𝑒−13 m∕s
computed from oedometric and constant-head permeability tests in the
laboratory. Ref. 47 identified permeabilities for the intact host rock
in a range between 6.9 ⋅10−21 to 2.3 ⋅10−19m2 for gas and water
permeability measured in a permeameter called Hassler cell parallel
and perpendicular to the bedding plane.

--- Page 8 ---
International Journal of Rock Mechanics and Mining Sciences 174 (2024) 105624
8
G. Ziefle et al.
The evapometer measures the hydraulic conductivity 𝐾 in m/s by
measuring the humidity flux from a surrounding formation into a bore-
hole at a 21 cm long test interval, the so-called matrix permeability.
The intrinsic permeability 𝑘 in m 2 as a parameter characterizing the
host rock results from
𝑘 = 𝐾 ⋅ 𝜇∕(𝜌𝑔) (3)
with intrinsic permeability 𝑘 in m 2, hydraulic conductivity 𝐾 in m/s,
viscosity 𝜇 in Pa ⋅s, density 𝜌 in kg/m 3 and gravity 𝑔 in m/s 2. The
measured permeability in m 2 is also presented in Fig. 7 indicating
similar ranges than the pulse tests. Within the evapometer, a silica gel
absorbs the air humidity which results in a change of the electrical field.
For more information on the evapometer measurements the reader is
referred to Ref. 16. As the evapometer measurements (carried out in
summer 2020) are also influenced by the saturation of the host rock,
the measurements indicate lower values for the humidity flux (up to
two orders of magnitude) in the nearfield of the niche, characterized
by a significant dehydration of the host rock. It has to be kept in
mind that these assumptions are based on very few data points and
hopefully can be convinced by further measurements in the future.
The measured permeabilities are presented in comparison with other
boreholes measurements in Figs. 8–11.
4.4. Time domain reflectometry (TDR/Taupe) measurements
The application of Time Domain Reflectometry, TDR, with the
Taupe measurement system uses high-frequency voltage pulses on elec-
trodes in contact with the material to determine its related apparent
relative dielectric permittivity, ARDP. Due to the high ARDP of water
(about 80 at room temperature) in relation to low ARDP of mineral
materials (3...6), TDR method allows to identify water content in such
environments. The traveling time of a pulse along the electrodes and
back can be determined and the mean ARDP over the length of the
electrodes calculated. Amplitude distribution of the TDR raw signal
over the electrode length allows to determine the spatial resolution of
ARDP values. A calibration function is necessary to calculate the water
content from ARDP.
TDR tube sensors, consisting of two coupled parts of 2 m length
each, are mounted in the vertical and horizontal boreholes in the twin
niches. Because the sensors, mounted on the outside of the tubes, might
not be in good contact to the host rock over its complete length,
a certain time has to be maintained to establish reliable results for
the ARDP determination. This is less significant for the horizontally
installed tubes, but vertically installed sensors require up to 100 days
until convergence of the host rock provides closing of possible air gaps
around the tube sensors. Starting conditions and settling processes are
not influenced by atmospheric conditions in open and closed niches,
but dominantly by the geological situation inside the host rock, given
by different layers crossing the bore holes.
The Taupe results presented in Fig. 10, Fig. 11, Fig. 8 and Fig. 9
show the timely resolved locally results for both niches. For the open
twin, results of nearly horizontal borehole A3 (Fig. 8) show an increase
in ARDP amplitude in a depth between 330 and 400 cm. Most signifi-
cant, a rise in ARDP up to about 10.5 indicates accumulation of fluid
at the back side of the borehole over time. Because of the inclination of
the horizontal boreholes of −10 degrees, fluid can progress by capillary
rise or ingress the amount of fluid coming from faults in the host rock.
The ARDP distribution from sensors in vertical borehole A4 (Fig. 9)
remains nearly constant with only small variations in depth and a
total range of ARDP between about 7 and 8. Slightly higher values are
concentrated in depth between 60 cm and 250 cm.
In the closed twin the nearly horizontal borehole A7 (Fig. 10) shows
a configuration that is nearly stable after about 110 days indicating a
zone of slightly higher ARDP centered at about 90 cm and ranging from
about 40 cm to about 200 cm. ARDP range is between 7.5 and 8.5 with
only low indication of additional fluid access, but on settling processes
in the host rock around the bore hole.
The rear part of the coupled TDR tube sensor in vertical borehole
A8 (Fig. 11), closed twin, was not completely inserted into the bore
hole and the sensor start is about 15 cm out of the bore hole mouth.
Results show an ARDP distribution which varies only slightly with
ARDP values ranging from 7 to 9 in a depth range between 100 and
250 cm. Additionally, a zone of ARDP values around 8.5 exist around
depth 285 cm and at the backside of the sensor up to ARDP values of
9. Because of its stability, this might show structural properties of the
host rock.
The structure of the vertical boreholes, A4 and A8, is comparable,
but absolute values are higher in A8. Responsible for the difference
in the vertical boreholes could be the different geological situation
at the location of the boreholes. As expected, the nearly horizontal
boreholes A3 and A7 show different structures and different ARDP
value ranges due to the distance between them. Despite the fact of
strong geology changes and different measuring orientations of the TDR
sensors, ARDP values of all measurements vary only in a narrow range.
Data of borehole A3 indicate a restricted inflow of fluid at the sensor
end, which is reducing over time.
At the front part of the TDR sensors ranges of lower ARDP exist,
possibly indicating the existence of an EDZ.
4.5. Nuclear magnetic resonance measurements (NMR)
Geophysical applications of nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) es-
timate the water content of porous geo-materials by detecting the
response signal of 1𝐻 nuclei after electromagnetic stimulation. The ap-
plication of an electromagnetic excitation forces the spins of the proton
nuclei in the water molecules to tilt away from their equilibrium. After
shutting off the excitation field, the spins relax back to equilibrium
in a static magnetic field, which is captured by the NMR sensor as
an exponentially decaying signal. The more 1𝐻 protons are included
in this process, i.e., the more water molecules are inside the sensitive
volume of the measurement, the stronger is the detected signal. A
simple linear relationship transfers the measured signal amplitudes into
estimates of water content. We determine the signal amplitude in this
study by mono-exponential fitting of the measured NMR data. Besides
water content, also pore space information can be provided from the
relaxation behavior of NMR signals such as pore size distribution, capil-
lary pressure curve, and permeability.48–50 However, the interpretation
of relaxation times for pure clay rock is an issue of resent research50–52
and is not part of the CD-A project at this early state.
The drilling program in 2021 was accompanied by measurements
using mobile NMR technologies for investigating the drilled rock cores
directly after taking them, the so-called single-sided NMR 53 and a mo-
bile core scanner. 54 Interpreting the results, one important difference
has to be kept in mind: While the single-sided NMR device measures
a thin slice with a thickness about 200 μm, the mobile NMR scanner
interprets several hundreds of cubic centimeters. Using a mobile NMR
core scanner provides the opportunity of keeping the core material
undamaged for subsequent studies. The working principle is the same
as for conventional laboratory NMR devices 49 with the limitation that
the mobility, i.e., flexible installation and usage anywhere in the tunnel,
comes at the costs of a light-weighed and thus weaker permanent
magnet inside. This leads to a worse signal-to-noise ratio compared
to the data quality of usual laboratory NMR data. Immediately after
taking the drilling cores, the core material was covered with plastic
foil and step-wise pushed through the device. Measurement points were
determined with a spatial resolution of about 20 cm, which corresponds
to the length of the sensitive range inside the Scanner. In doing so, a
more or less continuous coverage of the cores could be realized. The
results are depicted in Figs. 8–11 and compared to water contents as
measured in the laboratory by weighing at 105 ◦C and using the CCM.
The results are in agreement. In contrast to the drilling program in

--- Page 9 ---
International Journal of Rock Mechanics and Mining Sciences 174 (2024) 105624
9
G. Ziefle et al.
Fig. 8. Comparative presentation of the lithologic interpretation, the measured electric resistivity in Ω, seismic velocity in km/s, apparent relative dielectric permittivity, and
permeability in m 2 as interpreted from the horizontal boreholes and related cores taken in September 2019 and March 2021 in the open twin niche.
2021, the core water contents during the initial core drilling in 2019
had to be measured using single-sided NMR, for which specific samples
had to be prepared out of the cores. These results can also be found in
Figs. 8–11.
4.6. Calcium carbide method (CCM)
The Calcium Carbide Method (CCM) is a technique to measure the
water content of a soil sample of a few cubic centimeters based on this
chemical reaction:
2H2O + CaC2− > Ca(OH)2 + C2H2 (4)
By measuring the excess pressure due to the formation of the acety-
lene gas (C2H2) (and ethin C2H2) in a closed reactor, one can decipher
the amount of water (H 2O), which reacted with the Calcium Carbide
(CaC2). This technique is well adapted to measurements in-situ. In the
CD-A experiment, it has been first used in March 2021. For this purpose
we were using the ‘‘Carbide Moisture Meter’’ equipment from Radtke
Messtechnik. As soon as a core was drilled, we took a 20.0 g sample
of the soil and ground it in the calibrated pressure bottle using steel
balls and a stirring rod. Then an ampule with 7.0 g ( ±140 mg) Calcium
Carbide was introduced and the container was sealed. By shaking the
calibrated pressure bottle, the ampule cracks and the CaC reacts with
the free water molecules. After ten minutes of reaction, we measured
the increase of pressure on the manometer of the sealed bottle and
determined the water content in the sample.
During the drilling program in 2021, the CCM was applied in
addition to the NMR water content acquisition (see Figs. 8 –11).
5. Comparative presentation and interpretation
A comparative representation of the geophysical measurements and
geologic interpretation of the boreholes in horizontal and vertical
direction is presented in Figs. 8–11 for both niches.
To quantify the intra-facies variability of the Opalinus Clay at
the Mont Terri Rock Laboratory, the main facies types are further
subdivided into several subfacies (SF) types. Each subfacies type is
characterized by a distinctive color, lithology, grain size, fabric and
increasing carbonate content (Ref. 34):
• SF2: Medium-dark gray, sparsely bioturbated, continuous to dis-
continuous planar-parallel-laminated, argillaceous-siliceous
medium to coarse-grained mudstone including sparse bioclastic
fragments.
• SF2a: Dark gray, argillaceous-siliceous medium-grained mud-
stone, with less sparsely to moderately cemented silt-rich lami-
naes in comparison to SF2.
• SF3: Medium gray, moderately bioturbated, lenticular-laminated
or interwoven, siliceous-argillaceous sandy mud-stone with com-
mon bioclastic fragments.
• SF4: Medium-light gray, strongly bioturbated, flaser-bedded to
homogeneous siliceous-calcareous sandy mudstone with abun-
dant bioclastic fragments.
The lithologic characterization indicates various subfacies types are
occurring along the boreholes as can be seen in all drilling profiles.
Please note that the figures show a generalized overview, further
variations can occur at the cm- and sub-cm-scale. The Opalinus Clay
in the vicinity of the niches is characterized by the subfacies types SF2
to SF4 according to the classification of Ref. 34 . Subfacies type SF1
(homogeneous, argillaceous fine to medium grained mudstone) and SF5
(Light gray, medium to coarse grained calcareous-sandy mudstone to
limestone) were not encountered in the upper sandy facies of the CD-A
drill cores.
Regarding Figs. 8 –11 it becomes apparent, that a rather high-
lithological intra-facies variability subperpendicular to bedding is
widespread, as indicated by various small-scale subfacies variations
in this particular orientation. On the other hand, the data indicates a
rather low lateral variability parallel to bedding.
The lithologic profiles correlate to the measurements of the electric
resistivity. Varying resistivity in high-resolution ERT measurements can
be attributed to differences in clay mineral and carbonate content
or structural features (see below). Especially the vertical boreholes
indicate characteristic sequences with different resistivities with values
between 10 to 50 Ω m which correspond to varying subfacies types. In
the horizontal boreholes, this correlation is not as pronounced, since
in the boreholes parallel to bedding the ERT results depend on the
orientation of the high-resistivity carbonate layers as well as on the
measurement geometry.

--- Page 10 ---
International Journal of Rock Mechanics and Mining Sciences 174 (2024) 105624
10
G. Ziefle et al.
Fig. 9. Comparative presentation of the lithologic interpretation, the measured electric resistivity in Ω, seismic velocity in km/s, apparent relative dielectric permittivity, and
permeability in m 2 as interpreted from the vertical boreholes and related cores taken in September 2019 and March 2021 in the open twin niche.
Fig. 10. Comparative presentation of the lithologic interpretation, the measured electric resistivity in Ω, seismic velocity in km/s, apparent relative dielectric permittivity, and
permeability in m 2 as interpreted from the horizontal boreholes and related cores taken in September 2019 and March 2021 in the closed twin niche.
Generally, the intervals with higher carbonate content (subfacies
types SF3 and SF4) are characterized by increased values of electric
resistivity > 30 Ω m. On the other hand, the measurements that focus
on the water content like Taupe, NMR, and CCM measurements show
no clear correlation of the water content with the subfacies type in
question. In addition, the measurements of the interval permeability
derived from hydraulic pulse test indicates no clear correlation to
the lithologic profile. Nevertheless, due to general fluctuations in the
measured values as well as the rather low number of measurements to
date, no clear statement regarding the correlation between subfacies
type/lithology and measured water content is possible so far. A com-
parison of different facies types can be found for example in Ref. 33
while the measurements in the context of the CD-A experiment focus
on different subfacies types. The small-scaled water content measure-
ments (CCM and NMR) do not show the expected increasing trend
with increasing depth and differ to the Taupe results in this regard.
The reason for this is most likely the different integration ranges of
these measurements. The measured permeabilities show the expected
increase near the excavation and also some measurement anomalies,
such as the elevated permeability (10 −16 m2) at 2.5 m borehole depth
in borehole BCD-A27, which can be well explained by the presence
of an artificial discontinuity as it is reported in the lithology plot of
10 by the blue line and also in the borehole scan, showing a distinct

--- Page 11 ---
International Journal of Rock Mechanics and Mining Sciences 174 (2024) 105624
11
G. Ziefle et al.
Fig. 11. Comparative presentation of the lithologic interpretation, the measured electric resistivity in Ω, seismic velocity in km/s, apparent relative dielectric permittivity, and
permeability in m 2 as interpreted from the vertical boreholes and related cores taken in September 2019 and March 2021 in the closed twin niche.
horizontal fracture structure at 2.4 m (given in the supplementary data
for borehole BCD-A27).
In addition to the lithological variability, geophysical measurement
repetitions can provide information about the zone, which is affected
by the excavation: What is their extent and what is the degree of
influence? The geophysical measurements presented here are to be
seen as a time-related statement - they do not provide information
about the temporal evolution and a possible associated reversibility.
However, the geophysical monitoring is an important part of the long-
term program of the CD-A project and might provide insights also on
EDZ dynamics in the future. The evolution of the EDZ has already
been in the focus of previous investigations as for example discussed
by Ref. 55 providing information about the hydro-mechanical evolution
of the EDZ as transport path for radionuclides and gas. Especially
the MSM indicates the extent of the EDZ very clearly as presented in
Figs. 8–11 and indicates an extent of the EDZ varying between 20 cm
and 50 cm, measured immediately after the excavation of the niches
(BCD-A3, BCD-A4, BCD-A7 and BCD-A8). The EDZ is characterized
by clearly reduced p-wave velocities varying between 1000 m/s and
2600 m/s, compared to velocities between 2800 m/s and 3500 m/s
for the intact rock. 1.5 years later (in the boreholes BCD-A24 to BCD-
A27), the EDZ can only be measured clearly in the vertical direction
of each twin, while there is no clear change in the measured velocities
in the horizontal directions. While the open twin is characterized by a
significant increase of the measured EDZ, there is only a minor increase
in the closed twin. As resistivity is dependent on porosity and water
saturation (Ref. 56 ), some features of the unsaturated EDZ are also
visible in the geoelectric profiles, showing increased resistivities 𝜌 >
25 Ω m. This effect can be found in all resisitivity measurements of
the open twin and also in the early horizontal measurement (BCD-A7)
of the closed twin.
The measurements of the apparent relative dielectric permittivity
with the Taupe sensor as well as the permeability measurements by
the pulse tests provide information about the characteristics in the
nearfield of the niches. The measurements of the interval permeability
in boreholes BCD-A24 to BCD-A27 have been carried out 1.5 years after
the excavation of the niches ( Fig. 7). The extend of the zone showing
a significant increase of the permeability is significantly higher in the
open (up to 1 m) than in the closed niche (up to 50 cm), with max.
permeability values varying from usually (one outlier is measured at
a depth of about 40 cm) 10 −16 m2 (closed) to 10 −13 m2 (open). The
contrasting climatic conditions in the open and closed niche might be a
reason for the different extent of the EDZ and the differences of several
orders of magnitude in interval transmissibility.
The measurements of the apparent relative dielectric permittivity
with the Taupe sensors indicate varying values in the nearfield of
the niches compared to the deeper parts of the boreholes. Due to the
continuous evolution of the ARDP, the range of the EDZ is not easy to
distinguish in the dataset, but comparing TDR results in this area with
ERT results indicate ARDP values below about 7.5 as a delimitation of
a zone away from the niche surface (Open twin about 40 cm for A3
and A4, closed twin: about 15 cm for A7 and about 25 cm for A8).
Focusing on the temporal evolution of the nearfield effects in Figs. 8 –
11, the measurements indicate nearly constant values for both niches
and show no significant apparent increase of the damaged area around
the niches. Considering all three methods, the extent of the affected
zone in the nearfield of the niches is in the same range, nevertheless,
the exact values may vary e.g. in the horizontal borehole of the open
twin.
As several fault zones and discontinuities are crossing the studied
section of the Opalinus Clay, the interpretation of the measured values
with regard to existing heterogeneities is of interest. The compre-
hensive geologic interpretation provides information about artificial
discontinuities as well as the information regarding core losses, the
location of different subfacies types, the orientation of the bedding
planes and the lithologic characteristic of the host rock. Taking this data
into account, it is possible to relate some of the observed anomalies
in permeability (outside the EDZ) to discrete artificial and tectonic
features (see Fig. 10 where these effects can be correlated with the di-
agram). For example, the elevated permeability (10 −17 m2⋅m) at 2.5 m
borehole depth in borehole BCD-A27 can be well explained by the
presence of an artificial discontinuity (blue line in the lithology plot
in Fig. 10).
Discontinuities may vary significantly with regard to their mechan-
ical and hydraulic properties and the interpretation of the relevance
of fault zones concerning their impact on coupled thermal–hydraulic–
mechanical and chemical effects is challenging. Fig. 12 provides an
overview of the observed faults and fault zones in the vicinity of the

--- Page 12 ---
International Journal of Rock Mechanics and Mining Sciences 174 (2024) 105624
12
G. Ziefle et al.
Fig. 12. Observed fault zones in the vicinity of the twin niches and extensometer measurements of strains.
Source: Taken from Ref. 32 .
twin niches. For more information about the structural interpretation
and the measured displacements, the reader is referred to Ref. 32 .
Comparing the lithologic description and the geophysical/geohydraulic
data with the occurrence of fault zones results in some interesting
observations which are summarized in the following section.
6. Results and discussion
The presented methods of investigation aim on various parameters
and build a useful combination to investigate the characteristic of
the claystone at a meter-scale around the niches. The subfacies types
can be identified with electric resistivity measurements and lithologic
description. Given that the measurements of lithology, water content
and permittivity exhibit no clear correlation, it becomes evident that
the primary objective of a numerical model is to represent the overar-
ching coupled behavior rather than individual subfacies. Consequently,
a homogeneous modeling approach might be sufficient to capture this
behavior in the presence of diverse subfacies types of Opalinus Clay.
However, there has to be a particular focus on the EDZ around the
excavations as this area is characterized by various heterogenities and
an ongoing evolution over the years. Nevertheless, also the presented
measurement examinations provide information about the extent of the
EDZ around the niches (ERT, MSM, Taupe, Pulse test) at the borehole
locations, their evolution 1.5 years after excavation and the impact of
the climatic conditions on the EDZ. While the initial extent in both
niches and both directions results to 20 to 50 cm, 1.5 years later
we found no clear indications of the EDZ (by ERT measurements) in
horizontal directions of both niches, while the EDZ in vertical directions
results to 140 cm in the open and 50 cm in the closed twin, indicating
a significant impact of the climatic conditions on the EDZ evolution.
This impact is also seen in the permeability measurements in horizontal
as well as vertical direction - permeability measurements 1.5 years
after excavation with hydraulic pulse tests display different behavior
in the closed (affected area up to 50 cm) in comparison to the open
twin (affected area up to 100 cm) and differences of several orders of
magnitude in interval permeability. The most obvious reason for this
result - which has to be confirmed by further measurements - seems to
be the different climatic conditions of the niches. Nevertheless, aspects
such as the characteristics of the claystone, the orientation in relation
to stress field and bedding and the climatic boundary conditions must
be taken into account. Nevertheless, the Taupe measurements indicate
no remarkable change of measured permittivity in the EDZ over time.
The Opalinus Clay in the vicinity of the twin niches is characterized
by several discontinuities like fractures and fault zones with varying im-
pact on the hydraulic as well as mechanical conditions. Heterogeneities
such as faulted areas as well as micro cracks can be investigated due
to the lithological description of boreholes, geologic characterization
of the host rock, the electric resistivity measurements (especially sea-
sonally affected fractures), and potentially the Taupe measurements,
indicating an impact of fractures on the hydraulic effects. While there
seems to be a correlation between some of the observed artificial
discontinuities and the electric resistivity as well as the permeability,
the overall impact on the water content seems to be low in the range
of the borehole length of 4 m. Nevertheless, the impact of these kind of
heterogeneities varies significantly from case to case and underlines the
very complex behavior of claystone. The resulting change of material
parameters may be of significant importance concerning a potential
safety case of a long-term HLW repository and therefore is planned
to be in the focus of further investigations, aiming particularly on the
decimeter-scale around the excavations.
The water content is a key parameter for the coupled effects in
the vicinity of the twin niches, which is observed in this project by
a combination of various methods. In Ref. 31 , water content measure-
ments performed along the surface of the niches were correlated with
eletrical resistivity data and numerical modeling. Seasonal effects have
been described and the statistical evaluation of such temporal data
has been argumented and correlated with geological characterization.
The investigations enable a temporal description of the water content
evolution around the niches, indicating the highly heterogeneous near
field effects. Here, NMR and CCM measurements have been successfully
conducted using the fresh core material immediately after drilling to
provide water content profiles as original as possible. The two methods
yielded very similar results that could be validated by subsequent
weighing in the laboratory. These water content profiles with values
scattering within the range of 10 to 16 vol% do not show clear trends
or systematic variations and thus support the idea of a homogeneous
water content model for the numerical HM simulations at the average
of the observed values. However, further investigations are necessary
to access the relationship between the lithological subfacies types and
corresponding water content. A clear relationship does not seem to exist
regarding our data base to date, which is not intuitive. One challenge
in this context is the different dimensions at which the individual
methods monitor the water content and their individual measurement
principles ranging from a few μm (single-sided NMR), over a few
cubic centimeters (CCM) up to several hundreds of cubic centimeters
(mobile NMR). Further laboratory research, which considers these
methodological issues, is underway to characterize how the pore water
in the Opalinus Clay reacts at the μm to the cm scale on atmospherical
changes.
Although indicated by Taupe, an increasing water content with
increasing depth in the range of the EDZ was not observed with NMR

--- Page 13 ---
International Journal of Rock Mechanics and Mining Sciences 174 (2024) 105624
13
G. Ziefle et al.
and CCM. We address this observation to the fact that these methods
work at a smaller scale than Taupe and are thus not able to probe
volumes large enough to cover the corresponding changes, i.e., most
likely cracks and fissures.
The long-term CD-A experiment is a favorable environment to fur-
ther evaluate the presented investigation procedure aiming on a quan-
titative evaluation and verification of the used measuring and model-
ing approaches. Additional investigations like laser scans, convergence
measurements, and extensometer measurements are carried out within
and around the niches. They focus on the deformation behavior of the
host rock around the niches and are discussed in combination with
geologic interpretations, numerical modeling approaches and visual-
ization techniques in Ref. 57, and Ref. 32. Investigations focusing on
the pressure evolution conducted by mini-piezometer, psychrometer
and thermo-hygrometer measurements in combination with numerical
modeling procedures are underway. Within a HM coupled framework,
the numerical procedure should describe the changes of water content
as observed during the experiment. Furthermore, it is important to
study the excavation-induced effects, e.g. size of EDZ, accounting for
the mechanical anisotropic behavior of the rock that affects the EDZ
shape/formation and, consequently the pore pressure distribution. Note
that the initial in-situ stress state as well as initial pore pressures also
have an influence on how the excavation will deform and how the wa-
ter content will distribute. 58 Furthermore, the ability of the numerical
model to reproduce such behavior must be critically evaluated.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
Acknowledgments
The work described in this paper was conducted in the frame-
work of the Mont Terri Project. The CD-A experiment itself is funded
by the partners BGE (Bundesgesellschaft für Endlagerung, Germany),
BGR (Bundesanstalt für Geowissenschaften und Rohstoffe, Germany)
on behalf of the BMWK (Bundesministerium für Wirtschaft und Kli-
maschutz, Germany), ENSI (Eidgenössisches Nuklearsicherheitsinspek-
torat, Switzerland), GRS (Gesellschaft für Anlagen- und Reaktorsicher-
heit gGmbH, Germany), Helmholtz (Helmholtz-Gemeinschaft Deutscher
Forschungs–zentren e.V., Germany) and swisstopo (Bundesamt für Lan-
destopografie, Switzerland). This support is gratefully acknowledged.
The views expressed in the paper are, however, those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the Funding Organizations.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary material related to this article can be found online
at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijrmms.2023.105624.
References
1. Wild KM, Amann F. Experimental study of the hydro-mechanical response of Opal-
inus Clay–Part 1: Pore pressure response and effective geomechanical properties
under consideration of confinement and anisotropy. Eng Geol . 2018;237:32–41.
2. Wild KM, Amann F. Experimental study of the hydro-mechanical response of
Opalinus Clay–Part 2: Influence of the stress path on the pore pressure response.
Eng Geol . 2018;237:92–101.
3. Zhang C-L, Laurich B. Mechanical behavior of sandy facies of Opalinus Clay
under different load conditions. J Rock Mech Geotech Eng . 2020;12:223–241.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jrmge.2019.09.005.
4. Millard A, Bond A, Nakama S, Zhang C, Barnichon B. Accounting for anisotropic
effects in the prediction of the hydro-mechanical response of a ventilated tunnel
in an argillaceous rock. J Rock Mech Geotech Eng . 2013;5(2):97–109. URL https:
//www.scopus.com, Cited By :8.
5. Ip SCY, Borja RI. Evolution of anisotropy with saturation and its implications
for the elastoplastic responses of clay rocks. Int J Numer Anal Methods Geomech .
2022;46(1):23–46. URL https://www.scopus.com, Cited By :1.
6. Wang C, Talandier J, Skoczylas F. Swelling and Fluid Transport of Re-sealed
Callovo–Oxfordian Claystone. Rock Mech Rock Eng . 2022. URL https://www.
scopus.com.
7. Fernàndez-Garcia D, Gómez-Hernández JJ, Mayor J-C. Estimating hydraulic
conductivity of the Opalinus Clay at the regional scale: Combined effect of
desaturation and EDZ. Phys Chem Earth A/B/C . 2007;32(8–14):639–645.
8. Pardoen B, Talandier J, Collin F. Permeability evolution and water transfer in
the excavation damaged zone of a ventilated gallery. Int J Rock Mech Min Sci .
2016;85:192–208.
9. Hale S, Ries X, Jaeggi D, Blum P. Mechanical and hydraulic properties of the
excavation damaged zone (EDZ) in the Opalinus Clay of the Mont Terri rock
laboratory, Switzerland. Solid Earth . 2021;12:1581–1600. http://dx.doi.org/10.
5194/se-12-1581-2021.
10. Chen X, Xie SY, Zhang W, Armand G, Shao JF. Creep Deformation and Gas
Permeability in Fractured Claystone Under Various Stress States. Rock Mech Rock
Eng. 2022. URL https://www.scopus.com.
11. Alcolea A, Kuhlmann U, Marschall P, et al A pragmatic approach to abstract the
excavation damaged zone around tunnels of a geological radioactive waste repository:
Application to the HG-A experiment in Mont Terri, Vol. 443 No. 1 . Geological Society
Special Publication; 2017:127–147.
12. Kolditz O, Fischer T, Frühwirt T, et al GeomInt: geomechanical integrity of host
and barrier rocks–experiments, models and analysis of discontinuities. Environ
Earth Sci . 2021;80(16). URL https://www.scopus.com.
13. Pardoen B, Bésuelle P, Dal Pont S, Cosenza P, Desrues J. Effect of Claystone
Small-Scale Characteristics on the Variability of Micromechanical Response and
on Microcracking Modelling. In: Barla M, Di Donna A, Sterpi D, eds. Challenges
and Innovations in Geomechanics: Project: Accounting for the Spatial Variability of
Argillite’s Properties Through a Multi-Scale Numeric-Experimental Approach . Springer;
2020. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-64514-4_52.
14. Gawin D, Schrefler B. Thermo-hydro-mechanical analysis of partially saturated
porous materials. Eng Comput . 1996;13(7):113–143.
15. Bishop AW, Blight G. Some aspects of effective stress in saturated and partly
saturated soils. Geotechnique. 1963;13(3):177–197.
16. Ziefle G, Bossart P, Costabel S, et al Mont Terri, CD-A experiment: Installation report
TN 2020-41 . Mont Terri Technical Note; 2021.
17. Bossart P, Bernier F, Birkholzer J, et al Mont terri rock laboratory, 20 years
of research: introduction, site characteristics and overview of experiments. In:
Bossart P, Milnes AG, eds. Mont Terri Rock Laboratory, 20 Years: Two Decades of
Research and Experimentation on Claystones for Geological Disposal of Radioactive
Waste. Cham: Springer International Publishing; 2018:3–22. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-319-70458-6_1,
18. Hostettler B, Reisdorf AG, Jaeggi D, et al Litho- and biostratigraphy of the opalinus
clay and bounding formations in the mont terri rock laboratory (Switzerland). In:
Bossart P, Milnes AG, eds. Mont Terri Rock Laboratory, 20 Years: Two Decades of
Research and Experimentation on Claystones for Geological Disposal of Radioactive
Waste. Cham: Springer International Publishing; 2018:23–39. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-319-70458-6_2,
19. Nussbaum C, Kloppenburg A, Caër T, Bossart P. Tectonic evolution around the
Mont Terri rock laboratory, northwestern Swiss Jura: constraints from kinematic
forward modelling. In: Bossart P, Milnes AG, eds. Mont Terri Rock Laboratory, 20
Years: Two Decades of Research and Experimentation on Claystones for Geological Dis-
posal of Radioactive Waste . Cham: Springer International Publishing; 2018:41–68.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-70458-6_3,
20. Jaeggi D, Laurich B, Nussbaum C, Schuster K, Connolly P. Tectonic structure of
the ‘‘main fault’’ in the opalinus clay, mont terri rock laboratory (Switzerland).
In: Bossart P, Milnes AG, eds. Mont Terri Rock Laboratory, 20 Years: Two Decades
of Research and Experimentation on Claystones for Geological Disposal of Radioactive
Waste. Cham: Springer International Publishing; 2018:69–86. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-319-70458-6_4,
21. Amann F, Wild KM, Loew S, Yong S, Thoeny R, Frank E. Geomechanical behaviour
of opalinus clay at multiple scales: results from mont terri rock laboratory
(Switzerland). In: Bossart P, Milnes AG, eds. Mont Terri Rock Laboratory, 20 Years:
Two Decades of Research and Experimentation on Claystones for Geological Disposal
of Radioactive Waste . Cham: Springer International Publishing; 2018:153–173.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-70458-6_8, URL ,
22. Kneuker T, Hammer J, Shao H, Schuster K, Furche M, Zulauf G. Microstructure
and composition of brittle faults in claystones of the Mont Terri rock laboratory
(Switzerland): New data from petrographic studies, geophysical borehole logging
and permeability tests. Eng Geol . 2017;231:139–156.
23. Keller LM, Holzer L, Schuetz P, Gasser P. Pore space relevant for gas perme-
ability in Opalinus clay: Statistical analysis of homogeneity, percolation, and
representative volume element. J Geophys Res Solid Earth . 2013;118(6):2799–2812.

--- Page 14 ---
International Journal of Rock Mechanics and Mining Sciences 174 (2024) 105624
14
G. Ziefle et al.
24. Houben M, Desbois G, Urai J. A comparative study of representative 2D mi-
crostructures in Shaly and Sandy facies of Opalinus Clay (Mont Terri, Switzerland)
inferred form BIB-SEM and MIP methods. Mar Pet Geol . 2014;49:143–161.
25. Laurich B, Urai JL, Nussbaum C. Microstructures and deformation mechanisms in
Opalinus Clay: Insights from scaly clay from the Main Fault in the Mont Terri
Rock Laboratory (CH). Solid Earth . 2017;8(1):27–44.
26. Bock H. RA Experiment: Updated Review of the Rock Mechanics Properties of the
Opalinus Clay of the Mont Terri URL based on Laboratory and Field Testing . Mont
Terri Technical Report; 2009 2008–04.
27. Bossart P, Burrus X. GA18: The Gallery 2018, Extension of the Mont Terri Rock
Laboratory. Mont Terri Technical Report; 2019.
28. Ziefle G, Bossart P, Costabel S, et al Influence of humidity on cyclic and longterm
deformations: CD-A experiment, Mont Terri Rock Laboratory. In: Innovative
Feuchtemessung in Forschung Und Praxis: Berichtsband Zur Tagung 2019,Karlsruhe,
10.-11. Oktober 2019 . Schuhmann, R.; 2019:65–78.
29. Maßmann J, Ziefle G, Costabel S, et al In-situ Experiment on the Influence of Hu-
midity on the Cyclic and Long-Term Deformation Behavior (CD-A) of the Opalinus
Clay at the Mont Terri Underground Research Laboratory, Switzerland: Mea-
surement Program and Pre-Simulations. Geophys Res Abstracts EGU2019-6788-1 .
2019;21.
30. Jaeggi D, Galletti M, Amacher F, et al Mont Terri Project, Gallery 2018: Excavation
and geological documentation . Technical Report 2018-04; Mont Terri Technical
Report; 2020.
31. Ziefle G, Cajuhi T, Costabel S, Furche M, Maßmann J. Water content evolution in
the EDZ of Opalinus Clay: A methodic approach for a comparative interpretation
of measurements and modelling (accepted). J Rock Mech Rock Eng . 2024.
32. Ziefle G, Cajuhi T, Graebling N, et al Multi-disciplinary investigation of the
hydraulic-mechanically driven convergence behaviour: CD-A twin niches in the
Mont Terri Rock Laboratory during the first year. Geomech Energy Environ .
2022:100325. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gete.2022.100325, URL https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2352380822000090,
33. Kneuker T, Furche M. Capturing the structural and compositional variability of
Opalinus Clay: constraints from multidisciplinary investigations of Mont Terri drill
cores (Switzerland). Environ Earth Sci . 2021;80(421).
34. Lauper B, Jaeggi D, Deplazes G, Foubert A. Multi-proxy facies analysis of
the Opalinus Clay and depositional implications (Mont Terri Rock Laboratory,
Switzerland). Swiss J Geosci . 2018;111:383–398.
35. Esefelder R, Wawerzinek B, Lüth S, Giese R, Krawczyk CM. Seismic anisotropy
of Opalinus Clay: tomographic investigations using the infrastructure of an
underground rock laboratory (URL). Swiss J Geosci . 2021;114(1). URL https:
//www.scopus.com.
36. Abednego M, Blascheck P, Schefer S, et al Seismotectonic analysis around the
Mont Terri rock laboratory (Switzerland): a pilot study. In: Mont Terri Rock
Laboratory, 20 Years: Two Decades of Research and Experimentation on Claystones for
Geological Disposal of Radioactive Waste . Cham: Springer International Publishing;
2018:235–253. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-70458-6_12,
37. Bossart P, Bernier F, Birkholzer J, et al Mont Terri rock laboratory, 20 years of
research: introduction, site characteristics and overview of experiments. Swiss J
Geosci. 2017;110(1):3–22.
38. Kneuker T, Blumenberg M, Strauss H, Dohrmann R, Hammer J, Zulauf G.
Structure, kinematics and composition of fluid-controlled brittle faults and veins
in Lower Cretaceous claystones (Lower Saxony Basin, Northern Germany): Con-
straints from petrographic studies, microfabrics, stable isotopes and biomarker
analyses. Chem Geol . 2020;540(119501).
39. Schuster K, Furche M, Shao H, et al Understanding the evolution of nuclear waste
repositories by performing appropriate experiments selected investigations at Mont
Terri rock laboratory. Adv Geosci . 2019;49:175–186.
40. Knödel K, Lange G, Voigt H-J. Environmental Geology − Handbook of Field Methods
and Case Studies . Springer; 2007.
41. Günther T, Rücker C, Spitzer K. Three-dimensional modeling and inversion
of dc resistivity data incorporating tomography – II. Inversion. Geophys J Int .
2006;166:506–517.
42. Rücker C, Günther T, Spitzer K. Three-dimensional modeling and inversion
of dc resistivity data incorporating tomography – I. Modelling. Geophys J Int .
2006;166:495–505.
43. Schuster K, Amann F, Yong S, Bossart P, Connolly P. High-resolution mini-
seismic methods applied in the Mont Terri rock laboratory (Switzerland). In: Mont
Terri Rock Laboratory, 20 Years: Two Decades of Research and Experimentation on
Claystones for Geological Disposal of Radioactive Waste . Cham: Springer International
Publishing; 2018:215–233. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-70458-6_11,
44. Wenning Q, Madonna C, Zappone A, et al Shale fault zone structure and stress
dependent anisotropic permeability and seismic velocity properties (Opalinus Clay,
Switzerland). J Struct Geol . 2021;144(104273).
45. Cho W, Kim J-S, Lee C, Choi H-J. Gas permeability in the excavation damaged
zone at KURT. Eng Geol . 2013;164:222–229.
46. Crisci E, Ferrari A, Giger SB, Laloui L. Hydro-mechanical behaviour of shal-
low Opalinus Clay shale. Eng Geol . 2019;251:214–227. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.enggeo.2019.01.016, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0013795218313991,
47. Al Reda S, Yu C, Berthe G, Matray J-M. Study of the permeability in the
Opalinus clay series (Mont Terri - Switzerland) using the steady state method
in Hassler cell. J Pet Sci Eng . 2020;184. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.petrol.
2019.106457, URL https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-
85072082297&doi=10.1016%2fj.petrol.2019.106457&partnerID=40&md5=
f5cf473dd7ef3aa0feb552731672db70, Cited by: 3; All Open Access, Bronze Open
Access, Green Open Access.
48. Kleinberg R. Utility of NMR T2 distributions, connection with capillary pressure,
clay effect, and determination of the surface relaxivity parameter r2. Magnet Reson
Imag. 1996;14:761–767. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0730-725X(96)00161-0.
49. Müller-Petke M, Yaramanci U. Tools and techniques: Nuclear magnetic resonance.
In: Treatise on Geophysics . Elsevier; 2015:419–445. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
b978-0-444-53802-4.00206-2.
50. Elsayed M, Glatz G, El-Husseiny A, et al The effect of clay content on
the spin–spin NMR relaxation time measured in porous media. ACS Omega .
2020;5(12):6545–6555. http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.9b04228.
51. Fleury M, Romero-Sarmiento M. Characterization of shales using T1–T2
NMR maps. J Pet Sci Eng . 2016;137:55–62. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
petrol.2015.11.006, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0920410515301728,
52. Ohkubo T, Ibaraki M, Tachi Y, Iwadate Y. Pore distribution of water-
saturated compacted clay using NMR relaxometry and freezing tempera-
ture depression; effects of density and salt concentration. Appl Clay Sci .
2016;123:148–155. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.clay.2016.01.014, URL http://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0169131716300163,
53. Blümich B, Perlo J, Casanova F. Mobile single-sided NMR. Progr Nuclear
Magnet Reson Spectrosc . 2008;52(4):197–269. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
pnmrs.2007.10.002, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S007965650700091X,
54. Vista Clara I. NMR solutions for soil and core. 2021 online available at https://
www.vista-clara.com/nmr-solutions-for-soil-and-core/, inspected on 2 Oct 2021.
55. Marschall P, Giger S, De La Vassière R, et al Hydro-mechanical evolution of
the EDZ as transport path for radionuclides and gas: insights from the Mont
Terri rock laboratory (Switzerland). In: Mont Terri Rock Laboratory, 20 Years:
Two Decades of Research and Experimentation on Claystones for Geological Disposal
of Radioactive Waste . Cham: Springer International Publishing; 2018:175–196.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-70458-6_9,
56. Shah PH, Singh D. Generalized Archie’s law for estimation of soil electrical
conductivity. J ASTM Int . 2005;2(5):1–20.
57. sigeom. Mont Terri Project, Convergence Monitoring By Laser Scanning in Niches 3
and 4, Gallery 18 . Mont Terri Technical Note; 2020.
58. Vu M-N, Guayacán Carrillo L, Armand G. Excavation induced over pore pres-
sure around drifts in the Callovo-Oxfordian claystone. Eur J Environ Civ Eng .
2023;27(8):2614–2629. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19648189.2020.1784800.